Dark Psychology and Manipulation : Delve Into Darkness and Learn the Subtle Art of Hacking the Human Mind Through Emotional Influence, Body Language, NLP Secrets, Hypnosis and Mind Control Techniques by Bradberry, Brandon 1/54 2/54 3/54 Dark Psychology and Manipulation DELVE INTO DARKNESS AND LEARN THE SUBTLE ART OF HACKING THE HUMAN MIND THROUGH EMOTIONAL INFLUENCE, BODY LANGUAGE, NLP SECRETS, HYPNOSIS AND MIND CONTROL TECHNIQUES BRANDON BRADBERRY 4/54 © Copyright 2020 - All rights reserved. The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted without direct written permission from the author or the publisher.Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author, for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this book. Either directly or indirectly. Legal Notice: This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the content within this book, without the consent of the author or publisher. Disclaimer Notice: Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment purposes only. All effort has been executed to present accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete information. No warranties of any kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The content within this book has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before attempting any techniques outlined in this book. By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as a result of the use of information contained within this document, including, but not limited to, - errors, omissions, or inaccuracies. 5/54 Table of Contents Introduction Chapter 1. Dark Triad and the Dark Psychology Traits Personalities Chapter 2 . Emotional Manipulation Chapter 3. Factors That Make You Vulnerable to Manipulation Chapter 4 . Covert Emotional Manipulation Tactics Chapter 5 . Dark Persuasion Methods Chapter 6 . Mirroring and Barnum Effect Chapter 7 . Deception Chapter 8 . Dark NLP and Nonverbal Communication Chapter 9 . Dark Hypnosis and Hypnotherapy Chapter 10. Brainwashing and Mind Control Techniques Chapter 11. Dark Games and More Subtle Advanced Techniques Chapter 12. How to Protect Yourself Against Emotional Predators Chapter 13. Toxic Relationships and How to Deal with Them Chapter 14. Secrets for Speed Reading and Analyzing People Chapter 15. Micro-Expressions and Body Language Signs Chapter 16 . Dark Seduction Chapter 17 . Undetected Mind Control Chapter 18 . The Internet and Dark Psychology Chapter 19 . The Real Vampires Chapter 20. Behavioral Traits of Favorite Victims of Manipulators Chapter 21. Applying Manipulation and Mind Reprogramming in Different Roles Conclusion 6/54 Introduction What Is Normal Psychology? N ormal psychology, otherwise called basic psychology, or simply psychology, is a study of the mind and behavior. Psychology (Greek - soul; Greek - knowledge) is a science that studies the behavior and mental processes of people and animals. The psyche is the highest form of the relationship of living beings with the objective world, expressed in their ability to realize their motives and act on the basis of information about him. Through the psyche, a person reflects the laws of the world. This is what psychology aims to understand. Thinking, memory, perception, imagination, sensation, emotions, feelings, inclinations, temperament - all these moments are studied by psychology. But the main question remains - what drives a person, his behavior in a particular situation, what processes does their inner world entail? The range of issues addressed by psychology is wide enough. So, in modern psychology there are a large number of sectors: - General psychology - Age-related psychology, - Social psychology, - Psychology of religion, - Pathophysiology - Neuropsychology, - Family psychology - Sports psychology, etc. Other sciences and branches of scientific knowledge (genetics, speech therapy, jurisprudence, anthropology, psychiatry, etc.) penetrate into psychology. In order to live in harmony with himself and with the world around him, modern man needs to master the basics of psychology. Psychology operates with the following methods: 1.) Introspection - observation of one’s own mental processes, cognition of one’s own life. 2.) Observation - the study of certain characteristics of a process without active involvement in the process itself. 3.) Experiment - an experimental study of a specific process. An experiment can be built on the modeling of activities in specially defined conditions or can be carried out in conditions close to ordinary activities. 4.) Development study - the study of certain characteristics of the same set of people (children, a tribe, etc.), which are monitored for several years. As a science, psychology originated in the second half of the 19th century, having separated from philosophy and physiology. Psychology explores the mechanisms of the psyche unconscious and conscious of man. A person turns to psychology in order to know himself and better understand his loved ones. Such knowledge is essential in seeing and realizing true motives of their actions. Psychology is also called the science of the soul, which at certain points in life begins to ask questions - "who am I?", "Where am I?", "Why am I here?" Why does a person need this knowledge and awareness? To stay on the road of life and not fall in one ditch, then in another. And having fallen, find the strength in yourself to rise and move on. Interest in this field of knowledge is growing. By training the body, athletes necessarily come to psychological knowledge and expand it. Psychology is actively pouring into training and education, into business, into art. A man is not only a storehouse of certain knowledge and skills but also a person with his own emotions, feelings, ideas about this world. Today, knowledge of psychology is indispensable either at work or at home. To sell yourself or a product, you need certain knowledge. In order to have well-being in the family and be able to resolve conflicts, knowledge of psychology is also necessary. Understanding the motives of people's behavior, learning to manage their emotions, being able to build relationships, being able to convey their thoughts to the interlocutor - and here psychological knowledge will come to the rescue. Psychology begins where a person appears and, knowing the basics of psychology, many mistakes in life can be avoided. "Psychology is the ability to live." What Is Dark Psychology? We define Dark Psychology as the art and science focusing on mind control and manipulation. Psychology, as a general term, aims at studying and understanding human behavior. It is focused on our thoughts, actions, and the way we interact with each other. Dark psychology, however, just focuses on the kinds of thoughts and actions that are predatory in nature. Dark psychology examines the tactics used by malicious people to motivate, persuade, manipulate, or coerce others into acting in ways that are beneficial to themselves, and potentially detrimental to the other person. The best definition for dark psychology is that it is the study of a human status in its connection to the people’s psychological nature to prey upon other people. The entire humanity possesses a certain potential to victimize not only their fellow human beings but also other living creatures. Whereas, other individuals who might want to sublimate or restrain this kind of tendency, there are also others who opt to act upon some of these impulses. What dark psychology seeks to achieve is to make one understand those perceptions, feelings, and thoughts that end up leading to the predatory behavior of human beings. Dark psychology assumes this type of production is done for a given purpose and contains certain goal-oriented and rational motivation nearly all the time. The remaining portion of this time is essentially the dangerous victimization of other people with no purposive intent. In other words, we can perceive and define it by both religious doctrine and evolutionary science. The point of dark psychology, as a subject, is to try to understand those thoughts, feelings, and perceptions that cause people to behave in predatory ways towards each other. Experts in dark psychology work under the assumption that the vast majority of human predatory actions are purposeful. In other words, most individuals who prey on others (99.99%) do it for specific reasons, while the remaining people (0.01%) do it for no reason at all. The assumption is that when people do evil things, they have specific motivations, some of which may even be completely rational from their point of view. People do bad things with specific goals in mind and specific rationales for their actions, and only a tiny fraction of the population brutally victimizes others without a purpose that can be reasonably explained by either evolutionary science or some form of religious dogma. You have heard many times that everyone has a dark side. All cultures and belief systems acknowledge this dark side to some extent. Our society refers to it as “evil” while some cultures and religions have gone so far as to create mythical beings to whom they attribute that evil (the devil, Satan, demons, etc.). Experts in dark psychology posit that there as some among us who commit the worst kinds of evil, for purposes that are unknown. While most people may do evil things to gain power, money, retribution, or for sexual purposes, there are those who do evil things because that’s just who they are. They commit acts of horror for absolutely no reason. In other words, their ends don’t justify their means; they cause harm for its own sake. Dark psychology is rooted in 4 dark personality traits. These traits are; narcissism, Machiavellianism, psychopathy, 7/54 and sadism. People with such traits tend to act in ways that are pointlessly harmful to others. The skills and methods of influencing others can be quite different. They can be used both for constructive purposes and for various frauds. The characteristics of those who manage to influence people, no matter what is the “dark” in the dark psychology name. People who successfully use dark psychology have understood fully all aspects of normal psychology. Thus, they understand themselves as well as others around them. They easily analyze others with this skill. They perceive the views, opinions and other information from those whom they wish to influence. Bulk of fraudulent “exploits” using dark psychology as a special state of the psyche was not associated at all: the victim of dark psychological influence simply could not find an explanation for what happened. As has been noted more than once, the specifics of dark psychology make the active user “process” the client in a roundabout way. He does not give direct commands to do this or that but encourages a person to do it as if he is acting on his own initiative. The person comments, asks, consults and - gets his way. Behind his behavior is a certain strategy. One of them is speculation. The phrase stands in such a way that some phenomenon, action or object is presented in it as if it was actually accepted. For example, they ask you: “Will you pay in dollars or bitcoins?” The question is innocent, but you have not yet said that you intend to purchase this thing at all. The question assumes that you have already made such a decision and it remains to solve the trifle - to pay in bitcoins or dollars, about which you begin to reflect. I suppose that what was read caused the reader an ironic smile: a primitive ploy, visible, as they say, with the naked eye. Do not rush to conclusions. Let me remind you that the "seller" has already adjusted to you and leads you, your consciousness is no longer as critical as when reading these lines. This is the basis of analyzing people first, then thinking steps ahead of them, even about their own actions and reactions. The essence of this technique is as follows: the dark psychologist makes up the text of the suggestion, and then “dissolves” it in a story of neutral content. During the conversation, the “user” in some way selects the words of suggestion and they turn out to be a brilliant trap for consciousness. He (or she) will change the volume of speech, pause in characteristic places, speed up or slow down the story. There are other tools for highlighting words and phrases in order to consolidate them in the subconscious. The “user” can emphasize the right places in the story with gestures, facial expressions, touching your arm, shoulder, back. He can approach you sharply, turn around, turn away, etc. All these manipulations, if you follow them, are the basis of dark psychology. Now let's think about how often this is done to us against our will. And how this new knowledge is about to turn your life around. But first, it is worth considering the various personality types you should get ready to come across... These three aspects are going to come together to form the Dark Triad. When one person has all of these three traits in them, it can be a hard task to stay away and not get pulled into whatever plan they have. Being on the lookout for these can make a big difference in how much control you have in your own personal life. Delving into Dark Psychology Dark psychology is an art and a science-it seeks to manipulate others in a way that controls the other person. Through a series of behaviors such as manipulation, coercion, or persuasion, an individual seeks to get exactly what he or she wants, no matter the cost. By and large, people care about how other people feel, and endeavor to behave ethically and acceptably, but what about the minority of people who do not? What is Dark Psychology? Dark psychology refers to the mindset and techniques people can use to get what they want. Often aligned with the dark triad and manipulative people seeking to better themselves while harming everyone around them, dark psychology can be an effective skill to develop and master for yourself if you have to interact with other people. In fact, many people in public positions or positions of power turn to dark psychology to learn how to better get the results they want. Even salespeople frequently are taught skills that would fall within the list of dark psychology manipulation or mind control. Keep in mind that there is manipulation, and there is an influence. Influence is normal; it involves swaying others to allow for goals to be worked toward. When influencing others, boundaries are honored and it is based on honest communication and respect for the other person, including respecting if the other person decides not to do whatever it is you would like. In contrast, manipulation is covert and coercive. The manipulator uses cunning and power to sway the other person. Rather than communicating clearly, the manipulator may lie or over-exaggerate in order to get the desired result. They may assert that they are in a position of power that they may or may not have, and they will push you to oblige them, preying on anything they can in order to get what they want. People are expendable. People’s values are expendable. Anything is expendable if it means their desires are met. Dark psychology’s manipulation is primarily selfish. Every bit of manipulation is to ensure that the individual’s wants come to exist. They do not care about the outcomes, or how it may impact the other person-they are only concerned with themselves. These sorts of manipulative tactics and tendencies are encountered on a daily basis in a wide range of situations. Even television ads may inundate you with attempts to sway your perceptions of things in hopes of getting you to buy their products. In a world filled with constant attempts to manipulate you and sway your thoughts, you may be thinking, how can you possibly understand how to protect yourself from it? Or even better, how can you begin tapping into those skills to use them ethically to see the results you hope to achieve? The first step to this understands the key facets of dark psychology, from how it works to why people use it. Understanding and learning this information will prepare you to understand why. How Dark Psychology Works The entire construct of dark psychology and manipulation may seem difficult to understand-after all, avoiding falling for manipulation seems like an easy enough task to have, right? Unfortunately, manipulation can be quite covert, hiding underneath a thin veil of deniability and other pretty wrappings designed to keep the insidious nature of the manipulation undetected. According to the psychologist, George K. Simon, there are three key aspects that make manipulation successful. These are: Hiding the true intentions and behaviors behind something more friendly or good-natured. The truth may be hidden behind faux concern or authority. Understanding the target’s vulnerabilities so you can deliberately choose how to proceed. The manipulator takes the time to understand anything that can be exploited. Being callous enough to not feel guilty at inflicting harm to the target if doing so becomes necessary. Even if 8/54 whatever is done causes physical, mental, financial, or other harm, that is acceptable. Ultimately, the only person who matters is the manipulator, and the only goals that matter are his or her own. Attempts at coercion and manipulation meet these three standards to be sufficiently successful to work. For example, imagine that you sell cars and you want to convince someone to buy a car that will land you a better commission. You would go through these three steps to influence your customer into buying them. First, you would likely want to disguise your interest in selling someone a specific car as concern for them. If they want to buy an older car, you may try to upsell the safety features of the newer model in hopes of convincing them to buy the more expensive car, or you may show how this newer model has some new feature that you exaggerate to make sound imperative to them. If they have children, you may try to emphasize how the trunk can be opened hands-free, or that there are a backup camera and sensors in the bumpers that will alert them in case a child was to sneak behind them. Knowing that the parents are likely to be easily swayed by appeals to emotion, you may offhandedly mention how you had heard a story in the news about someone who accidentally ran over their child backing up, and that it was too bad that their car had not been equipped with the backup camera. You use your knowledge that parents are typically quite vulnerable when it comes to the welfare of their children and use that knowledge to your advantage. Because you are detached from the target and motivated to sell, you do not feel any guilt about telling them the story. You want to instill fear in them that makes them feel like spending more money is necessary for the protection of their child’s life. You want them to fear the consequences that could potentially follow if they do not do what you want. You want them to feel like their only option is to follow through with buying the car. Ultimately, the three of those criteria combine, and you end up with the intended effect-the parents agree to buy a car out of their original price range out of fear of running over their child. You successfully took advantage of the situation, reading the situation and understanding exactly how best to proceed. These are the fundamentals of beginning to manipulate others. Why Dark Psychology is used Ultimately dark psychology is used to influence others into doing what you want, regardless of what the cost. You seek to advance your own interests, even if it is at the expense of another. This can be seen in a wide range of situations, from politics to television, to within relationships. It can be used to sell products that you otherwise would not consider, or sway who you vote for in an election. The knowledge of how to motivate people to do whatever they want or need enables you to manipulate them. It enables you to get the results, sometimes without the other person being aware of your influence. The most effective, and sometimes the most dangerous, forms of manipulation occur in ways that are undetected, meaning that the individual being manipulated believes that the decision how to act was determined by his or her own volition. Manipulation in the Media Though people often want to think of the media as unbiased or truthful, that is rarely the case. Especially on controversial subjects, the media’s reports will be designed to sway the readers and catch attention. Certain facts may be omitted to sway opinions, or facts may be exaggerated or taken out of context. Stories may be meant to trigger fear in hopes that they keep your attention. Stories meant to anger may be used to draw in page views online. Word choice is imperative, and can sway the opinions of readers, and is done to appeal to heuristics. Heuristics are ways that we understand or solve problems based on past experience. These are applied through the news. When you read the news, first, the relevant information is processed with a central part of your mind. Anything deemed irrelevant is instead processed peripherally. This information is understood through heuristics-the opinion you develop about the irrelevant information is swayed by your own heuristics. With that in mind, it becomes easy for the media to manipulate. It may leave out facts, use buzzwords meant to trigger certain heuristics or certain opinions. If the media source is trying to cover up a story that they wish to go unnoticed, they may put out a different story to distract from it. For example, if it is a largely liberal news source and there is some controversy over a Democratic politician, the news source may instead try to distract with a story about a Republican politician doing something in hopes of distracting readers. Manipulation in the Workplace Workplace manipulation can be particularly harmful to wellbeing. As you may feel as though you are trapped at work due to financial constraints, even if you want to leave the job, you may be unable to. Unfortunately, some workplaces even encourage this sort of behavior, as, on the surface, it appears that the manipulator is effective. The behaviors can frequently get desired reactions from those around them, but oftentimes, that is for the wrong reasons. The manipulator may work to win your trust before slowly eroding your sense of self within the workplace and the opinions others may hold of you until you suddenly realize you have been manipulated and have few ways to fix the situation. This manipulation may take the form of coercion or threats from higher-ups, threatening you with the loss of your job if you do not perform to certain standards, or pitting you against coworkers. Whatever the reason those around you choose to justify their behaviors, you find your own production slipping. You feel miserable and alone at work, and you no longer feel motivated to do your best. You may even feel harassed or pressured into making decisions that you do not agree with. This is exactly what the manipulator wants and in doing so, you feed right into it. This manipulation has further layers of insidiousness-if you dare complain to HR, higher-ups, or anyone else, you automatically get identified as the troublemaker. If you try to protect yourself, you are seen as a troublemaker. You end up in a position where you comply or fail to keep your job. It becomes easier for you to comply, allowing you to keep your job and continue making money, but that comes at the cost of your sanity. This creates the false illusion of increased productivity, as everyone does work; they do as their manipulator demands, knowing they have no choice. In reality, though, health takes a toll, and over time, that health drain will drain productivity. Manipulation in the workplace is unhealthy and unwarranted, though it does happen regularly. It allows for those in power to remain there with the least amount of effort while the underlings do all the heavy lifting without risking a backlash. Manipulation in Relationships Healthy relationships are typically considered very give-and-take. You give to your partner, and your partner gives to you. This ensures that both people’s needs are met, and you are able to create a true partnership, in which each member brings true value to the relationship. Sometimes, however, one person ends up manipulated by the other. It could start out innocently enough, with the manipulator leaning heavily on his or her partner, making the partner feel as though he or she is responsible for the manipulator’s emotional state. When one party of the relationship is manipulative, it becomes one-sided. Only the manipulator has his or her needs met, and the manipulator will slowly demand more and more from the manipulated. Eventually, the manipulated really only serves the purpose of meeting the needs of the manipulator on command. Ultimately, this degrades the relationship into an unhealthy parasitic relationship instead of the symbiotic one that most people strive to achieve. 9/54 This is problematic-the manipulated finds him or herself thoroughly stuck, and quickly begins to feel the drain and impact on mental and physical health while the manipulator only gets more extreme in his or her parasitic actions. Oftentimes, the manipulator in relationships has some deep-seated need to be validated in order to feel secure and requires his or her partner to be entirely obedient or the manipulator feels unstable and vulnerable. Manipulation in Politics Politics are particularly manipulative, and these manipulations can be seen with every election cycle. Consider how each party may be attempting to appeal to one specific dynamic: If a politician is seeking to earn the votes of an ultra- conservative, religious group of people, the politician’s ad may highlight how the lack of religious values may degrade society. It may point to ways that people have become perverted and use that to justify how anything less than conservatism is a direct affront to religion. On the other hand, a politician looking for liberal, non-religious people’s votes would likely attempt to convey that allowing religion into politics is the antithesis of what the country was founded upon and that since people have that freedom to religion, they should not find themselves under religious law. They may even point to ultra-conservative, ultra-religious countries in which certain groups of people have fewer rights as examples of what not to do or may point that those who do not share a religion should not be forced into living a way that is religious. Both of these people seek to appeal to different people by invoking feelings of fear of what would happen if that particular politician did not receive their votes, and those feelings of fear inspire the people to vote accordingly. The person terrified of a society that he or she may deem is corrupt and sinful will vote for the conservative leader, whereas the person afraid of being ruled religiously would vote for the liberal leader. Realistically, however, neither extreme that the voters feared would come to fruition, regardless of whoever was elected. Political ads typically manipulate viewers through several methods in an attempt for politicians to be elected. They frequently cherry-pick details to share and neglect to share the whole story with the viewers. They seek to sway people’s votes based on appealing to unconscious biases, which in turn serve to benefit the politicians, even if they may not share the same beliefs as those to whom they seek to appeal. The voters feel as though they have been given all of the information they need while the manipulative politicians only provide what paints them in the best colors, leaving the trusting voters woefully uninformed and voting in ways that they may not have necessarily voted if they had known the whole picture. Manipulation in Sales Sales may seem to lack manipulation, as the buyer has all the power. However, it becomes very easy for salespeople to use the information they have in front of them about you, or the information about you that you provide in order to sway your purchasing decisions. Salespeople, particularly those who sell well, are experts at profiling their clients, figuring out exactly what they want or need, and upselling as much as possible. Some people may say that that is the nature of the salesperson’s job-they are literally people who sell things. Is this really manipulative? It can be. If the salesperson is more concerned with his or her numbers and sales, then yes. By virtue of caring about his or her needs and influencing the other person with selfish needs in mind, it is manipulative. Manipulation involves influencing the other people to make decisions according to the manipulator’s whims, and that can absolutely become a problem in sales-related jobs. Consider a time in which you were a buyer, and the seller was quite amicable, flattering you constantly while discussing how there is a one-time deal right that moment, saying act now or never, and that if you do not take up the deal right then, then it is off. The deal may seem appealing at first, but upon further analysis, it may become clear that the deal is not very good at all. The reason for this pressure is to make you feel as though you have to choose, and oftentimes, people feel more inclined to give in to temptation, choosing to buy when they think they are getting a deal, even if that deal is actually misrepresented. Consider the stores that price items higher and always seem to have sales running to discount their prices. Buyers may look at these and see that they appear to be discounted, even though that discount is really just a mind trick designed to make the buyer see a larger percentage at total discount earned. 10/54 Chapter 1 Dark Triad and the Dark Psychology Traits Personalities W hat is the first thing that comes to mind when you hear the dark triad? Probably some fictional realm created by Hollywood, right? Well this is actually a key concept that ties together all aspects of dark psychology. The dark triad in a nutshell is the theme that houses the three most destructive and harmful psychological personality traits known to man.in the concurrent pages, well shall seek to bring these traits to light and Better understand them for adequate preparation against them.by the time we are done, you will realize that all other themes of dark psychology stem from this very theme. These traits are psychopathy, narcissism and Machiavellianism. The majority of individuals by the mention of these very traits will have a stereotypic description of psychopath as a murderous person, and a narcissist as a human who is just obsessed with themselves. There is however much more to these antisocial disorders than just the stereotypes. Each of these concepts must be respected and understood for their power to become apparent. Machiavellianism This is a technique that traces its origins from the famous political philosopher known as Machiavelli. His established works on influence and political power, “The Prince”, Machiavelli shares with the rest of the world his version of ideas, principles, and tactics that have saved the purpose of a sort of blueprint for those individuals who might be looking for influence throughout the course of history. Based on this, we then ask ourselves what this Machiavellian person actually is and how he comes about. What puts this particular tactic on the map is basically the manipulator's affinity to only focus on one's self-interest at all times, the exercise of ruthless power and cruelty, one's understanding of the importance of image and the perception and superficial appearance.in a nutshell, Machiavellian individuals are people whose approach to life is widely strategic. Meaning that, the ramifications and consequences that they take are usually well thought out and assessed in terms of how they might end up impacting their lives if they do it in a particular way .you may simply identify a Machiavellian individual since their speech often revolves around something like, “how will this benefit me, and how will my public reputation be impacted by this result?” Machiavellian individuals are pros at doing that which personally serves their interests while at the same time skillfully managing to maintain the best public image without anyone being the wiser. Perhaps one of the biggest examples of one such individual is that of the former President of the United States, Bill Clinton. He succumbed to his sexual desires while in office time and time again, while at the same time managed to keep the people's admiration for him stronger than ever. This is really an advantage he had over majority of politicians with the same lifestyle but is frowned upon by the public. Another example in the political arena is also that of President Barack Obama, and George W. Bush. Barack Obama while in office cultivated and capitalized on his love for peace while Bush solidified his image as that of a guy who always had war on his mind. Obama was able to manipulate the masses building a public perception that served his one interest evil Bush did to even try. This is despite the very fact that both of these presidents were as militant as the succeeding president. This is a very powerful lesson of what people perceive VS what the actual reality of things is. Psychopathy To be able to tell you in black and white what psychopathy really is would be difficult but the vary basic definition of what psychopathy really is ,or rather who a psychopath really is, is that particular individual who seems to be suffering from a type of psychological disorder which heavily involve a superficial charm, impulsivity and a lack of commonly held “human” emotions such as empathy and remorse. These psychopaths can be regarded as the most dangerous people on the face of the earth as they are the best examples of two-faced sons of bitches. Pardon my language. When majority of people hear the mention of these individuals, the first image that usually comes to mind is of a haggard looking individual wielding a machete and wearing a mask like John Wayne Agency. But the reality of their identity is far from this. They are most likely to be very handsome strangers who win over their victims by being just the right amount of charming, before eventually ruining or even ending their victim’s lives. Surprisingly, based on a series of tests, experiments, and observations, it has been discovered that there exists a high number of these individuals at the very helm of the business world. Many people are just now beginning to view psychopathy as more of a problem to the whole society that for the very psychopaths owns selves. They are usually programmed in such a way that they can survive in any field they chose to go into. This is mainly attributed to their indifferent views they have regarding normal human feeling of love, compassion and so forth. Narcissism If you ask anyone who they think a narcissus is, I can bet on it that the most likely answer you are likely to receive is that of an individual who simply loves themselves. This is along the correct lines but not accurate enough, particularly when narcissism is understood through the dark triad lens. Without being a narcissist, you can have self-love. So, what are some of the differences between a highly self-esteemed individual and someone who is narcissistic to the extent that they are regarded in the Dark Triad range? Someone who meets narcissism's medical diagnostic requirements, to the point that they are deemed to have a psychological disorder, is likely to continuously display a variety of the following characteristics. They are usually captives of the inflated sense of self-worth which manifests itself f in several ways. These include seeing their lives as the most special and important to have ever existed., seeing that they're of a biter spaces hire in status than that of “normal people”. This behavior often reflects their sense of self-worth. Narcissists are not, in their own minds, only special-they are superior. They are a better species of person, higher in status than “normal” people. Their behavior reflects their sense of self-worth. Some of narcissism's prevalent outward manifestations are an inability in any manner to tolerate criticism or dissent. The need to be flattered is like this need to be agreed. Narcissists need continuous praise, endorsement, and appreciation and tend to organize their life in a manner that provides them continuous access to others who meet this need. Having looked at the base of this particular behemoth theme of dark psychology, let us now dive in headfirst into how the dark triad manifests itself into the behaviors of these indifferent human beings. Machiavellian characteristics We know that a Machiavellian person is a political schemer who is mainly concerned border lining obsessed with his public image. These particular groups of individuals are considered to be the most cold-hearted in their pursuit of self- interest above all else. What then could be said about the behavior of these types of individuals? Due to their master level skill of masking their true intentions from the public eye, their behaviors might be abetted hard to decipher. For most individuals who do not fulfil Machiavellianism's clinical definition, their public person is generally a reflection of their true personal self. Everyone polishes their picture and conduct in public a little, but in general, the outward picture of most people is nothing more than a polished portrait of who they really are. They often have a fine line as to what they truly are and the person who they often pottery themselves to be in the public eye. Perhaps the best example to be given here is that of serial killers. The best has often been able to escape the grip of the law because of their outward image being the furthest thing from their morbid fascinations. The most famous example that can be 11/54 given on this is that of renowned serial killer, Ted Bundy. He was a very handsome man according to those who knew him. He was also very eloquent and just wall presented that no one imagines him to have a single bad bone in his body. This is what enabled him to murder an upwards of 30 women before he was eventually caught. Examples of such a distinction between intent and appearance can be found in areas less extreme than serial murder. There are countless tales of leaders in the world of business who manage to ruthlessly cut jobs and pursue profit over people whenever possible. In terms of Machiavellianism, the very best of these bosses can actually get individuals to purchase into the idea that they behave by necessity or even compassion! Such rulers are almost role models for those who only want to serve their own wishes while simultaneously appearing to be a "person of the individuals." A willingness to exploit people is another hallmark of Machiavellian individuals. Let us look at an example to have a better understanding of this. A newcomer in an office who possesses these Machiavellian traits would see each individual colleague, boss or team member as a resource or piece of a puzzle to use and utilize. The Machiavellian person would see a sequence of strategic threats and weaknesses to handle, exploit, or neutralize instead of seeing others as fellow human beings. This is a big component of the reason why Machiavellians are so conscious of how they find themselves. They understand that this outward depiction is the key to exercising impact and exploiting everybody they come across effectively. Another characteristic of Machiavellian people is the instillation of fear in the people around them. This comes straight from "The Prince" which urges individuals to simultaneously be both feared and loved. At the same moment, this notion of the desirability of being loved and feared is directly related to the Machiavellian characteristic of dividing a public and private perception. In the very individuals who would truly pretend to feel greater love than fear therefore, the ideal Machiavellian can inspire fear and obedience. Psychopathic characteristics It is in all aspects to know how this group of individuals manifest themselves to detect them early and putting up the necessary defenses against them. Charm is one of a psychopathic person's most prevalent behaviors. It must be understood that this charm is superficial rather than profound, real charm. If you think of a truly charming individual from your lifetime, you will probably acknowledge that they have favorable characteristics that underpin outward behavioral displays. However, if an individual genuinely displays a charming person as an expression of kindness, they should not be labelled as psychopaths. Psychopaths can show all the outward indications of charm such as physical appeal, obvious warmth, and interest in others. The inward motive behind these outward displays is why it's such a red flag. Psychopaths see charm as part of an equation. The manipulator usually asks himself as to whether if displaying a particular emotion towards the victim makes them feel in a particular euphoric way and also if the result will prove to be advantageous or themselves. They are very calculative people who are numb to normal human feelings. Lying is another trait that really makes psychopaths really stands out. We all lie in our day to day lives. This doesn’t necessarily mean that we are all psychopaths. However, it can show a psychopathic personality when coupled with other characteristics. Lying comes for a psychopath as naturally as breathing for most individuals who are psychologically healthy. A psychopath can convincingly present the reality in a specific time as anything they need it to be. Also, psychopaths do not demonstrate outward indications of lying because they do not have any emotional attachment or emotions of shame, guilt or excitement about their lies. Lying is just "doing what's required at the moment" for psychopaths. Another signature aspect of psychopathy is a lack of impulse control. Most individuals have processes and inner controls that stop them from acting rashly. These mechanisms of prevention are lacking for a psychopath. If a psychopath sees a chance they want to exploit, they will behave without hesitation or a second thought. This may require murdering someone they want to kill, violating someone they want to rape, or stealing something they want to steal. This cruel impulsiveness is what makes psychopaths in areas such as the army and company globe some of the most efficient individuals. Automatic adoption of decisive intervention is a feature that much non-psychopaths lack and this absence are, in fact, detrimental to life advancement. Another characteristic that distinguishes psychopaths from no psychopathic people is a lack of remorse. Many individuals who have committed atrocious acts, such as murder, feel a profound feeling of guilt and shame about what they have accomplished because of these emotions and even take their own lives. Psychopaths do not choose to be remorseful- they are physically unable to do so. Asking a psychopath to feel remorse is like asking to listen to music from a deaf individual. A lack of guilt is closely associated with a lack of remorse. Usually humans feel guilty when they break some kind of moral standard they value personally. Since psychopaths do not believe correctly or wrongly, only helpful or unnecessary, guilt is an alien notion for them. The nearest thing that a psychopath may convey to guilt or remorse is regret that they have not performed their psychopathic acts to their own high standards. Narcissistic characteristics One of the most prevalent characteristics in all almost all narcissists is the fantasies of their absolute power and elevated sense of importance. Most of these individuals lay blame to the constant praise they got as children while talking about these fantasies. As adults these individuals will still demand praise from all around hem since they have nurtured the feeling of being most important of their peers to the maximum. The inflated sense of self-worth experienced internally by narcissists also has consequences for their external reality. This typically manifests in two ways- the need for consent and praise, and criticism or rejection hate. For the narcissistic ego, praise and consensus are like oxygen, while criticism and dissent are like poison. Picture a dictator in a hermit state in order to comprehend what narcissism looks like when taken to its logical conclusion. Such individuals request worship from those over whom they have authority, statue building in their likeness, and full obedience and recognition. Any act of dissent or disagreement shall be punished quickly and brutally. North Korea would be an ideal contemporary illustration of narcissism's extreme manifestation. That nation's rulers request reverence like gods and execute and torture anyone who even dares to convey a thought or concept that is not entirely consistent with formal doctrine of the state. 12/54 Chapter 2 Emotional Manipulation S ome people are always lucky in that they can get what they want at any time the need arises. Sometimes they do so at the expense of others, this, however, is achieved via access to the emotional bank. They can influence your thoughts or emotions to their advantage and leave you a victim and vulnerable. Emotional manipulation, therefore, involves access to someone and influencing them for information or any other favors through their emotions. It sucks and it is unethical once you realize what has been done to you. Do not get confused, there are two sides to emotional manipulation. There is an ethical and unethical side. What feels like betrayal is the unethical one. However, mastering emotional intelligence plays a barrier role to these manipulations and keeps you in a safe spot. Owning space The main aim of emotional manipulation is to make you lose control of your emotions. It will involve making you stagger with emotions which on the other hand will make you even more vulnerable. Advantage will be taken, and they will access you and get all they wanted from you. If there existed a lock to the emotions, I am sure everybody would have their emotions locked away and unlocked only to intimate relationships or where your emotions will be valued. To make sure you are off the steering with your emotions, manipulators will invite you to a place where they know it is new to you but familiar to them. This will keep you off balance, the new environment will give him or her the dominance and feeling of being in control. You are new to the place and the manipulator will take advantage of the window between adaptability and regaining control. Your words against you How you talk or react speaks volumes and emotions can be passed along. Manipulators like a talkative person since it is easier to access them due to the link provided; speaking out. If you are the introvert type or a conservative person, it takes more effort to make you open up. Introverts would require tailored questions that will be well planned and will give you away from one by one. The manipulator makes sure the questions are aimed at the emotional state. Personal questions will open you up and you will start speaking with feelings, this is an indicator that manipulation is taking place and it is working. By asking simple and tailored questions that mostly are personal or involve something we like hobbies, interests among others will lead to saturation with emotions. A master manipulator will take advantage of the situation and make us of the questions to establish your beliefs, strengths, and weaknesses without you realizing it. Guilt Kind-hearted victims are easily vulnerable to emotional manipulation. Guilt will be used against you, especially if you are so sensitive you may end up giving in to their demands. Guilt will either make you give in or feel bad about yourself. For instance, you may both agree on something and when the time comes to complete the deal the manipulators will pretend to forget or even act as victims of your actions. By doing so they will be finding your soft spot and once they find it will be the target of manipulation. Guilt and sympathy will be served to you, if you are not strong enough you will fall for the play. They will influence you through that guilt since you will be under their spell and since you now believe they are the victims you will do all they ask just to make sure your ‘victims’ do not suffer anymore. Positive and negative emotions Emotions of sadness or happiness can also be a pathway for emotional manipulation. An emotional manipulator will play with your psychology, he or she will show you that what you might be going through is nothing compared to what they have going on in their lives. By doing this, they try to exalt you and win your trust. If you fall for that and believe there are more needy people than you in the world then you will loosen up and think that you are selfish. You will no longer focus on your big problem, rather you will focus on their ‘big unfortunate events’ since you will now feel pitiful. Once you trust them, then you give them a key to your emotional bank and surely, they will use it against you. Once you trust them, you might end up offering yourself to assist them, that, however, was their plan from the start; they will have attained their goal. Anger Anger is another emotion that can be used to induce emotional manipulation. Some people are natural peacemakers, they avoid confrontations and conflicts in all ways possible. Once a manipulator realizes you are this type of person, he or she will use anger, aggressive language or raise his or her voice or even drop several threats. These aggressive techniques are tailored just to make tick. The secret behind this aggressive approach is to induce fear and discomfort so that you can give in hastily without taking a second to think through. Once you give in to their demands, they now get control over you and now can manipulate you in whatever direction or way that pleases them. They use this opportunity to get what they wanted from you since you will be cooperative earing to bring another instance of acute aggression. Self-discipline and confidence Being self-driven and confident is a very strong barrier to the effects of emotional manipulation. With the right mindset, you become less vulnerable to emotional manipulation attacks. Insecure and sensitive people are the easiest target for emotional manipulators. They are easily spotted and accessible, they put their needs behind those of others and are often feeling the need to please. All a manipulator needs are to be caring, sensitive and with an urge to help out. The needy part of sensitive people exposes them, and the emotional manipulator will see it as a gate pass to influencing your thoughts, perceptions, and feelings to his or her advantage. With time the emotions break open and they are exploited easily since the manipulator was disguised as a caring and sensitive person. As the saying goes, birds of a feather flock together; the feeling of sharing the same trait will open them up for manipulation without their knowledge. Surprises Negative surprises are also another mechanism used to keep people off balance. When bombarded with the new unexpected news that comes with a limited timeframe will lead to panic. As you panic, you get little time or none to think of a counter move. They may be good enough to trap you with suggestions as they pretend to help yet it is a plan made to make you unstable both psychologically and emotionally. Once you become unstable and overwhelmed by the sudden change of events it becomes their opportunity to influence your decisions and any other emotion, they are interested in. They may even consider making more moves that will bind your relationship with him, her or them so that they can utilize that window of opportunity created by the panic moment. You may not realize it since they appear to be assisting whereas they are using you for their benefits. Criticism Criticism is also a tool for emotional manipulation. The manipulator will say bad things of you, ridicule you or even dismiss you. He or she will make sure her mission of dismantling you succeeds. Once you have had enough you end up off balance and believe they are much superior compared to the inferior you. You will feel so down, and their 13/54 opinions will stick. Once you are in this state you are vulnerable. The manipulator will make sure you understand that you can never be good at anything no matter what you do or invest in. This will get into you and you will be emotionally distressed. You will feel hurt and not worthy of anyone's help. They will then pretend to have answers to your problems. He or she will give you tips and suggestions that are so genuine looking and constructive. Once these well-outlined answers transform you and get you out of it, they threw you will worship them. Once they have your attention, they can then make you do what they want or influence you. Doubt Doubt and uncertainty are also other forms of leverage in emotional manipulation. You will receive a silent treatment until you start doubting your actions or words that you may have used the last time. The manipulators will do this deliberately to stir up the feeling of doubt, once you give in and break the silence by acting as the cause of the silence treatment will be a good chance to be taken advantage of. This creates a window of opportunity and they will manipulate you. Ignorance Pretending to be ignorant of your duties will also get things done. You may want to do something, but you want it done by someone else, let us say your spouse. She or he will note something is off and will try to make it right, but you pretend to be good with it but since they know it has to be right, they will do it anyway. 14/54 Chapter 3 Factors That Make You Vulnerable to Manipulation M anipulators always pick people who can become their easy target. You would not even realize and that would be so close to you that you become an open paperback in front of them. The skilled manipulators very well know where to start the conversation and when to end it. They observe you closely to know about your weak points so that they can control you easily through it. You might feel that you are controlling your life but when manipulators enter your life things change. They would start taking decisions for you, make you completely dependent on them and charge you according to them and you would not even realize it. You may be too much loving, caring and have a pleasing nature which attracts them the most. You might often go out of the box to help others and make them happy which makes them think that you can be easily manipulated. But whom would you blame for you being manipulated yourself to bring good to others or the person who did the harm to you? Just to make your friends or partner happy, you would go the extra mile to fulfil their needs which they do not even realize as you never let them know and in a situation like this, you cannot blame others as they do not even have an idea of what efforts you have taken to please them. Initially, they might feel pampered and good but then these small things that you do for them would increase their expectations. And when you stop behaving this way, they might get annoyed or start fighting. The more you would do for them the more would be their expectations. You would not get anything in return, but they would expect you to always make them feel special. This is the time you would realize that you are a victim when you would stop getting anything in return and you are being taken for granted. The only way you can stop people taking you for granted is by telling them how much effort it took to do something that you wanted. When you are being taken for granted it is a sign that you have become a victim and you need to come out of it or at least let them know what it takes to make them happy and the relationship sound. Let us learn about few things why people start taking you for granted- 1) You are adjusting- If you think of others while taking any decision, emotional and too much adjusting then it is sure that people would target you and make their first victim for manipulation. It becomes very easy for manipulators to play with emotional people. They know you would adjust to any situation to make you happy, so they take you for granted and start expecting even more. 2) You’re frightened- If you are afraid of people who are dominating, outspoken, loud and bossy. You think it is impossible for you to handle them and you feel very tensed and pressurized. You would instead agree to whatever they say instead of going against them as you think you cannot be like them and do not want to get into any sort of mess. According to you, this is the only way to handle them, but you are letting these people take you for granted and get done whatever they wish. But remember this can become a habit for them and a problem for you. So, do not let yourself become a victim and handle them wisely. 3) Self-confidence- You might lose your confidence when you have made any wrong decision in your life or have seen many failures. This is the major point where you give others a chance to rule you and manipulate you with their profane tricks. Till the time you would not show your importance to them, they would take you for granted and always try to demean your confidence and your self-esteem. Do not let this happen with you, stay with positive people and think good. Do not stress yourself and do things which make you feel good and increase your confidence. 4) Fear of being alone- You always want someone to be with you, you are scared of being alone. There are many people who think that by pleasing and doing something extra for their friends or partner would not leave them. Just for staying with them and to keep them in their life they do anything and everything for them. If someone wants to be with you, they would be with you even if you do not do extra things for them. So, do not be an easy victim and let people take undue advantage of you. Be with your friends and family who make you feel secure and are true to you. 5) Expect credits- If you strive hard to make others happy and do not expect anything in return, this is wrong. You have to be smart enough and make manipulators realize how much you do for them, love them or care for them. It is substantial because till the time they do not know your efforts and your care for them, they would not realize your importance or give the credit that you deserve. 6) Be spontaneous- You have a habit of postponing things which give you trouble or stress. You do not like dealing with them there and then and concluding it, you always things that deferring it might make it easy, but it is a baseless way of dealing with the situation. Running from a problem does not end it; in fact, people who know this weakness of yours might take decisions on your behalf, as it is the easiest way of getting things done from you as they very well know that you cannot say no. Manipulators use this nature of yours on their side in the best possible manner. So, do not let them do it instead of changing yourself and surprise them. 7) They own your life- because you are so sweet, they know when and how to make you cry or make you smile. When people know you in and out, you become weak in front of them and this is what manipulators always want. As they know you are a pleaser and a very sweet person, so it is easy for others to predict your behavior which makes them effortless for you to rule your life and get things done. 8) Your love for them- This is the first and foremost reasons why you become a victim or people take you for granted. They know that you love then and can do anything for them, what else does a manipulator need? They also know somewhere in their head that whatever happens you would never leave them; this makes them use you in the best possible manner. But if you think that your partner has this feeling for you, it is time to rethink about your partner or relationship. 9) Know your desires- This is really crucial for one to know. Think about what you like and act accordingly, even when you want to decide about a new dress, going to a restaurant or for a movie. You always think what the other person would react after you decide, will they like it or how would they feel. So, forget thinking about others wishes and dreams, think about yourself too. Doing for them selflessly and thinking one day they would realize how much you did for them, do not waste your time and life. Do not let others manipulate you and play with your emotions. Be tough and take your decisions. 10) Low expectations- You keep your expectations low with the people you love because you do not want to get disappointed. But you give so much to them in the hope that one day you will get back, which never happens though. So, from the start only when you realize that you would not get back you start expecting less. But the manipulator feels that there is no problem with them as you never point out or tell them. Thus, at times it is important to voice out your expectations and desires from them to make your relationship better. These were the ten pointers to keep in mind and change about yourself as no one will care or love you, till the time you do not do it. Always start first from you and analyze things. Think about what your desires are and what you want to achieve rather than always thinking of making others happy. If you do not modify yourself nobody can stop, you from becoming a victim and you will be taken from granted. If you love someone, you should give them but make sure that you get in return as well. See what they care about 15/54 your expectations, do they respect you and listen to what you want. If yes, then go ahead and give your 100%. If they do not consider your point of view, then it is time to stand up for yourself and raise your voice. 16/54 Chapter 4 Covert Emotional Manipulation Tactics D ark Psychology also spends time looking at Covert Emotional Manipulation. It is more commonly referred to as, CEM. CEM is a way to gain true power over someone without them even realizing it is happening. You will be so enthralled that these sneaky tactics will have you doing things you would not normally agree to. We have already talked about manipulation but there are so many different forms of it and this one is pretty important. It not only allows criminals and people with mal intent into your life it also breaks you down mentally. The effects of this type of manipulation can last forever if you are not careful. As noted, it is insanely subtle, which means looking for the red flags are very important. Covert Emotional Manipulation looks different depending on the people involved. Oftentimes, the victim will be slowly made to feel as if they can’t do anything without the other. It is a strange sort of codependency that happens over time. This happens without manipulation on occasion, the difference is when your partner is doing it intentionally to get you to behave or think differently. It may start with offers of help for simple tasks that you usually do on your own. They may follow it up with a critique to make you question your ability to do it. It starts small but they will continue to poke at it until you start to truly believe you can’t do it on your own. You can see it worked into all kinds of things and a ton of relationships. Depending on who you have allowed to do this to you, it could be mostly harmless. On the other hand, there are a lot of people with less than genuine intentions that could take this to an extreme. This type of manipulation can turn it to flat out brainwashing. In that case, it is possible that you will lose your free will forever. People that use CEM against other people pay great attention to detail. This can be endearing as it appears as if they are learning about you. In reality, they are observing your behavior, learning what makes you tick. This will grant them access on how to manipulate your emotions subtly to get what they want. They are truly hunting for your weaknesses. The heinous people and criminals that do this in life are calculating. They tend to have bigger plans and you are simply playing a role. They have no care or regard for how you feel or for the damage they are causing you. All they can see is the outcome that they are striving for. Finding that they are unable to ever sustain relationships is not surprising because of the selfish nature of how they are wired. As time goes on CEM turns into something else. What started out as little jabs that looked like they were made from love, become something much darker. As you start to lose control and bend your will the aggressor will pounce. They can become domineering. In addition, they will start to tear you down piece by piece to gain complete control. Playing with someone’s emotions is a great way to gain control over them. Some people would rather bombard someone with love to get them to do what they want, rather than being crasser or crude about it. Love bombarding is very typical of the narcissist. It is its own form of manipulation and it can be downright cruel in reality. You will feel like the most important person in someone’s world. You will go along with what they say hook, line, and sinker because you truly trust in what they say. Once this person has you there, they can easily force their will and beliefs onto you. Fighting against this is extremely difficult for some people. Becoming solid in your belief system will make it more difficult for someone to pray on your emotions. Another way to combat this dark tendency is to work on really knowing yourself. When you spend the time to meditate, self-actualize, and maintain control of yourself it is much easier to fend off attacks on your emotions. When someone manipulates your emotions, it can have detrimental impact for the rest of your life. Narcissists and Psychopaths do not, oftentimes, have the ability to have true feelings. They are shut off, in a way. So, them playing with yours is a simple way to gain control of you and the situation they are in. Practicing the art of NLP can also give you signs as to when these types of people are trying to harm you. Gut feelings and red flags should be paid attention to. Naturally, we have instincts and sometimes something just feels off from the beginning. Maybe you meet someone, and they seem just a little too perfect or you just feel a bit uncomfortable around them, don’t disregard these thoughts and feelings. We are wired to sense danger. This is not just physical danger that we sense but also emotional and mental danger. The phrase, “go with your gut”, is a good one and one that can help you avoid unpleasant situations. 17/54 Chapter 5 Dark Persuasion Methods B efore we indulge further into the major facets of persuasion, we will first have to comprehend the meaning of persuasion. Persuasion refers to the psychological influence which affects the choice that an individual ought to make. With persuasion, an individual is often inclined to make you buy his or her school of thought in a bid to change your thought process. In order for one to effectively achieve persuasion, there are a number of things that need to be put in mind. When we are able to go beyond the natural human framework and get a grasp of what moves others, then you are in a position to achieve effective persuasion. This is because you are aware of the pressure points and how best to manipulate them. When exploiting the art of persuasion, there are various pointers that can come in handy. These are: Mimicking As human beings of reason, we tend to vary from one individual to another. The diversity of this is what makes us appear in the discrepancy of others. Owing to this particular fact, you will find that as individuals, we are more drawn to be warm and welcoming to those people who exhibit the same characteristics as us. It could be a physical trait or just the way an individual carry themselves out. This type of technique is said to elicit positive feelings that go a mile when it comes to persuasion. When an individual has the feelings of liking towards someone, he or she is in a position to be swayed by your influence. In a bid to elaborate on this particular type of technique, we are going to employ the use of this scenario. In the hotel industry, especially in the most advanced and high-end ones, you will find that the allocation of a waiter is dependent on the customer. High-end hotels in the industry have high customer feedback and thus they tend to treat their clients in a manner that suggests so. A client, for instance, would be allocated a particular type of waiter who matches their description. For instance, French waiters are renowned for their exquisite service. Putting the client first is at the top of the list when it comes to this particular field. Many professionals have succeeded in this area owing to the manner in which they treated clients. This is because of the clients re the main source of business. Putting the client into consideration goes a notch higher to even saying the exact words that the client has said. With this, they are able to gather that you have aptly decoded what they meant. In order to accurately achieve this particular technique, an individual ought to do a number of things. First, he or she may consider doing in-depth research into the particular field of the question in order to see to it that what is required of them is met. Before you are able to achieve persuasion by the use of this technique, one ought to be well versed with the individual that he or she ought to persuade. This type of expertise should be keen enough to make sure that it elicits major points that may come in handy during the process of persuasion. Social Proof When it comes to persuasion, social proof has repeatedly proven its dominance. Before we go deeper into the technique, we first need to gather the meaning of social proof. Social proof refers to the process by which an individual’s feelings and thought process are affected by the way other people have reacted to the same issue. When it comes to social influence. An individual who is the persuader, draw his or her basis from the acts that others have engaged in time and again. It could be the norm. With human beings, the danger that occurs is the feeling of wanting to be associated with a group of people. Human beings want to accrue a sense of belonging either to a group of people or to a particular act and this is what puts them at a higher risk of being influenced easily. Employing social proof when persuading an individual will mean that you have a basis of a norm that has been used repeatedly by the people whom we consider to be in the same class. This basis must be something that most people engage in and not a few numbers. Take, for instance, there are newbies in the estate who are looking for service providers. This newbie would first be inclined to know what other people in the estate are using. Although they might not settle on the same option as the rest of the estate, this will be somewhat a buildup on to what choice they may choose to settle upon. Rather they may end up embracing what others have used. With this technique, the trick lies whereby you ought to create a distinction in the manner in which an individual sees himself or herself as per against others. You will only achieve persuasion by convincing this individual that the desired option is one that has been embraced by a large group of individuals. Reciprocity When it comes to this type of technique, one needs to understand that a good deed was done to another individual no matter how remote, tends to go a long way. From the wording of it, reciprocity refers to the process by which an individual is able to respond to a good deed by performing a good deed in return. With this type of technique, we will find that most people fail to notice at its onset not until you are obligated to return the favor. In the world today, it is almost as rare as the sun rising from the west as it is to find someone who will extend feelings of warmness and care towards you. Save the people whom we are closely related, we tend to feel differently when an individual who is not even in your circle of friendship extends warm-hearted feelings. The feeling of obligation arises as a result of being extended a good deed by an individual. This is the result of being extended with feelings of warmness. At this point, you are in a position to persuade the individual in the manner that you wish. This is because he or she would be obliged to follow in the direction of the wind. It should be noted that this particular type of technique ought to be time cautious. This is because the implication of reciprocity does not last forever. There are limits to this timeline and one should be cautious enough to make sure that these limits are not exploited. With the passing of more time, it weakens the wave of reciprocity. In order to achieve this particular type of technique, an individual ought to play in the tone of offers and obligations. If your offer is worth it, then it raises an obligation effect on the other hand. Thus creating a win situation. Consistency and Commitment This type of technique is wired on an already formed perception. An individual is in a position to settle on a particular choice. The choice that this individual pick would be pegged on him or her for as far as they go. From the wording of it, consistency and commitment refer to the fact that an individual is in a position to make a choice and stick to it with sheer determination and perseverance. When it comes to persuasion, not all techniques may work, and you may find that you hit rock bottom once or twice in your venture. When this happens, it is not advisable to give up. Consistency is what builds our character in almost every facet in life. This type of technique is vast in a manner that cuts across various fields not limited to the field of education and business. The first approach to an individual for purposes of convincing them may or may not end up in a manner that you wish. The first approach is often one that is characterized by rejection and in some cases mental torture. The best way to respond to this type of instance is by not giving up. The second encounter of individuals who first rejected your idea will see to it that you have an audience who understands what you are talking about. 18/54 Chapter 6 Mirroring and Barnum Effect What is Mirroring? F irst things first, you must learn what mirroring is. At the simplest, it is the human tendency to mirror what is happening around them when they feel a relationship to whatever it is that is around them. For example, if you look at an old married couple, they are likely to constantly be mirroring each other’s behaviors. It is essentially the ultimate culmination of empathy-the individuals are so bonded, so aware of each other and their behaviors, that they unconsciously mimic any behaviors that their partner does first. The two married people at the diner may both sip at their coffees at the same time as each other, or if one drinks, the other will follow shortly after. If one shifts in his seat, she will do so as well, always leaning to mirror the position her husband is in. If she brushes off something on her shoulder, he will unconsciously touch his shoulder as well. This act is known as mirroring, and it occurs in a wide range of circumstances. You do not necessarily have to be a married couple that has been together for decades for mirroring to be relevant, either-you can see it everywhere. The person interviewing you for a job may begin to mirror you when the interview is going well, or the person who thinks that you are attractive may mimic some of your behaviors as well. You can see these behaviors mimicked started quite early on in terms of how long people have been interacting as well- sometimes people will even hit it off right off the bat and begin mirroring each other, emphasizing the fact that they seemed to have clicked. Mirroring is essentially the ultimate form of flattery-it involves literally copying the other person because you like or love them so much. Children mirror their parents when learning how to behave in the world. Good friends often mirror each other. Salespeople wanting to win rapport, mirror people. No matter what the relationship is, if it is a positive one, there are likely mirroring behaviors, whether unconscious or not. Uses of Mirroring You may be wondering why something as simple as mimicry can actually be important to others, but it is actually one of the most fundamental parts of influence, persuasion, and manipulation. When you mirror someone, you can develop rapport. Rapport is essentially the measurement of your relationship with someone-if you have a good rapport with someone, you have developed some level of trust with them. The other person is likely to believe what you are saying if you develop rapport. However, if you have not yet developed rapport yet and you need the other person to listen to you, you can oftentimes artificially create that rapport through one simple task-mirroring. If you mirror the other person, you can essentially convince him to develop a rapport with you, whether it was something he wanted to develop on his own or whether you forced the point. By constantly mirroring the other person, you essentially send the signs to their brain that they need to like this person because this person is just like them. Remember the three key factors for likability? The first one was able to relate or identify with the other person. In this case, you are presenting yourself as easy to relate to simply because you want the other person to like you. With liking you comes rapport. With rapport comes trust, which you can use to convince the other person to buy cars, or do certain things that will benefit you. Building rapport even builds up the ability to be able to manipulate the other person-you need to be trustworthy for the other person to let you close enough to manipulate in the first place. How to Mirror Luckily for you, mirroring is quite easy to learn how to do. While it may seem awkward and unnatural at first, the more you practice it, the more natural it will become to you, and the more effective you can get at it. Remember, if you want to mirror someone, you will need to toe the line between too much and not enough. If you are too overt, the other person will catch on and will likely be more put off than convinced to like you. Take a look at these four steps so you can learn to mirror for yourself. Build up a Connection The first step when you are attempting to mirror someone is to start by building a connection somehow. If you do not feel the connection with the other person, they are not likely to be feeling a connection either. Keeping that in mind, you should begin to foster some sort of connection and rapport. This can be done with four simple steps on its own. Fronting: This is the act of facing the other person entirely. You start with your body oriented toward them, directly facing the other person to give them your complete attention. Eye contact: This is the tricky part-when you are making eye contact, you need to make sure that you get the right amount. The triple nod: This does two things-it encourages the other person to keep speaking because the other person feels valued and listened to, and it makes the other person feel like you agree with them. It develops what is known as a yes set. The more you say yes, the more likely you are to develop a connection with the other person. Fake it till you make it: At this point, you have spent a lot of time setting up the connection, and it is time for the moment of truth. You should imagine that the person is the most interesting in the world at that particular moment. You want to really believe that they are interesting to you. Then stop pretending-you should feel that they are actually interesting to you at this point. This is the birth of the connection you had been trying to establish. Pace and Volume Now, before you start mimicking their body language, start by paying attention to the other person’s vocal cues. You want to make sure you are speaking at the same speed as the other person. If they are a quick speaker, you should also speak quickly, and if they are a slower speaker, you should slow your own speaking pace down to match. From there, make sure you are also mimicking the volume. If they are louder, you should raise your own voice. If they are keeping their voice down, you should follow suit. These vocal cues are far easier to mimic undetected than the rest of the physical cues. The Punctuator Everyone has a punctuator they use for emphasis. It could be something like a hand gesture that is used every time they want to emphasize something, or it could be the way they raise their brows as they say the word they want to stress. No matter what the punctuator is, you should identify what it is and seek to mimic it at the moment. Now, oftentimes, this cue is entirely unconscious on the other person’s part, and as you begin to mimic it, the other person is likely to believe that you are on the same wavelength. This should really do it for you without making what you are doing obviously. The Moment of Truth 19/54 Now, you are ready to test whether you have successfully built up the rapport you need. When you want to know if the other person has officially been connected to you, you should make some small action that is unrelated to what you are doing at that particular moment and see if the other person does it back. For example, if you are having a conversation about computers, you may reach up and rub your forehead for a split second. Watch and see if the other person also rubs at their forehead right after you. If they do, they have connected to you, and you can begin to move forward with your persuasive techniques. What is the Barnum Effect? The Barnum effect is the effect that you see when people take something exceedingly vague and declare that it must be tailored to them. For example, imagine a horoscope-People often talk about how much of a Taurus they are because they are so stubborn, practical, and ambitious. Never mind the fact that many people can describe themselves as stubborn, practical, and ambitious, the people are wholeheartedly convinced that those vague descriptions of a person’s personality are so specific that they must be trusted. This concept applies to many different paranormal instances, such as astrology, as briefly touched upon, and fortune-telling. People will fall for vague hints at something that is clearly fishing for feedback in order to get something that could actually be utilized in a way that would be beneficial for the one attempting to manipulate others. People think that even the vaguest of hints is enough proof to legitimize whatever is being said, so long as they can at least in part identify with it. Using the Barnum Effect to Persuade When attempting to use the Barnum effect in order to actively persuade someone to do or believe something, you must start first with Barnum statements. These statements refer to any generalizations that could be true about the vast majority of people. Because they hold true for so many people, you can fool people into believing that you are getting a gut feeling or a paranormal sort of intuitive information. People are more likely to believe that someone is a legitimate psychic or fortuneteller when what is said to them is even remotely related to them. This leads to a wide range of people using this effect as they convince others that they are psychic, magic, capable of communicating with the dead or even reading crystal balls, tarot cards, or palms. Any of these things, which science rejects as impossible, can be attributed to the Barnum effect. Ultimately, psychology has studied the Barnum effect in two ways-in creating feedback for people in experiments, and in congruence with computers that are meant to give personality feedback to see whether people are more likely to believe true descriptions of themselves rather than a vague list of personality traits that could apply to nearly anyone in some capacity. In the end, it turns out that people are just as likely to accept vague, nearly meaningless descriptions than the truthfully generate personality descriptions that were actually personalized just for them. It appears that people are much more likely to accept positive statements. People are more inclined to reject a negative statement than a positive one when it is describing an individual’s personality. For example, someone is far more likely to accept something that says, “I am always stubborn and hardheaded,” as accurate when contrasted with something like, “I am horrible at respecting authority.” Because people are more naturally inclined to accept positive statements, you can use positivity to counteract negative comments if you combine them. For example, you can say that someone has trouble with authority, but they use that trouble respecting the authority of others to always look for ways to better leadership positions, or to use it as a natural drive in order to encourage them to actively pursue leadership. When you learn that people want to naturally follow vague statements that are largely positive, you can use this to your advantage, especially in a sales job. Imagine for a moment that you are a car salesperson again. A person walks in wearing sunglasses, some trendy clothing, and with a handbag that you recognize as a name brand. You instantly peg this person for someone who is likely to prefer status symbols over practicality, based on the brands that are covering her head-to-toe. In trying to talk to her about buying a car, you then can utilize the Barnum effect to influence the woman’s decision. Start with a vague comment about how much she seems to care about her appearance, leaving it just general enough that you did not imply anything serious, but leaving room for her to latch onto the idea that you understand her completely. When she is convinced that you are able to understand her and her needs, she is more likely to willingly go along with whatever it is you are suggesting at that moment. If you recommend that she gets a fancy car, she is likely to do so, and if you recommend, she gets something more practical, but spin it just right to fit with the label you have assigned, she is also likely to do so. By utilizing the Barnum effect, you can use small tidbits that are vague to create a false understanding of the people around you, and the people you are attempting to persuade will eat it up. 20/54 Chapter 7 Deception What Is Deception? D eception is identified as the act of misleading, promoting an idea, concept, or belief that is false or simply hiding the truth. If someone is 25 years old and says they are 30 years old, they are committing the act of deception. As humans, we deceive others a lot of times. Even the people we consider as honest deceive others or themselves several times a day, according to various studies. Deceiving others may not necessarily be a bad thing as it can help to avoid negative situations. In society, some lies can be used to maintain proper functioning as long as no negative consequences arise from the deception. For example, if the police announce that they will conduct swoops on places frequented by idle youth so as to keep them off the streets yet fail to do it; we can refer to this as a necessary form of deception. Therefore, we can add to the definition of deception as the act of concealing the truth and making people believe in falsehood for selfish benefits while exposing them to harm. So, if a child lies about being chased by a dog as the reason for coming late to school, they are not exposing the teacher to any harm. Even if the deceit was discovered, it would only spell more punishment to the student. When we are talking about harmful deception, it is the one where the agent promotes falsehood to gain an advantage over their victim. If such deceit is detected, it risks harming the subject more than the agent. The Process of Deception The overall concept of deceit is to propagate a false sense of reality, such as a story so that the target believes it and then far along doing something totally different. That said, the process of deception can be divided into three parts, as explained below: 1.The Objective Before finding their potential targets, deceivers first come up with the end goal (objective) in mind. For instance, a con artist decides what they want to get from someone. It might be money, a valuable item, or personal favors. Their type of objective is critical in the entire deception planning process. Once they have the end goal in mind, they work backward to find out what needs to be done to achieve it. 2.Identifying Potential Targets Once the goal is set, they go to identifying the most vulnerable type of people. Just like animals in the wild prefer the most vulnerable prey such as the young, aged, sickly, injured or weakest, a deceiver is also very careful when choosing his or her prey. Back to the example of the con artist, assuming their goal is to steal credit card details from someone, they might prefer going for older people who are not conversant with online purchases. An elderly person is easier to deceive on the internet than a young one. 3.Studying the Target Once the deceiver has identified the potential target, they start the process of studying them. The aim here is to figure out the target’s vulnerabilities and strengths. These include their capabilities, strongest emotions, capabilities, beliefs, preconceptions, social and family status, and so on. If they are successful in “predicting” the vulnerability of their targets, they know exactly where to hit so as to improve their efficiency. At this stage, they move in to create trust as the technique to reduce suspicion and gain control of the target’s mind. 4.Settling on the Best Technique The final stage of the deception planning process is to formulate the story or the most appropriate form of deception. There are multiple types of deception, such as camouflage, decoy, conditioning, dazzling, mimicking, diversion, and disinformation. This four-step process might appear like it takes weeks or months to plan, but it can even be made in a few minutes. A good example is when a bully wants to steal another person’s property. Although the planning process might take a few minutes, it adheres to the above template. Characteristics of Deceivers 1.They are Manipulative Deceivers are known to be manipulative people. They can switch between situations and personalities so they can persuade others, through covert force, to fulfill their selfish goals. A normal lie does not require a person to pre- condition the other so they can succeed. Rather, words or actions, usually not pre-planned, are used. However, a pragmatic deceiver displays manipulative traits. In a relationship, for instance, the lover who is always forcing the other to change their ways so they can be satisfied is more likely to be a deceiver. Frequent lies usually build up to chronic manipulation. In short, a person who displays a manipulative character is an obvious deceiver. 2.They are Good Actors A person who is good at deceiving others is a definite actor. Acting is the process of putting up a false show, either physically or psychologically. A good actor can arm themselves with false behaviors or stories to convince their subjects. For example, a healthy person can feign illness and ask the public or their friends for money to seek medical attention. If they are not good actors who can change their voices, looks, and mood, they risk not convincing others to give them money. On the other hand, if they put up convincing shows, they can easily win sympathy. 3.They are Intelligent It takes a lot of intelligence to convince the human brain to perceive reality in a manner that it would doubt in normal circumstances. Crafting an effective plan after observing a person for a short or long while is a tough task. However, deceivers are swift at decoding human behavior. They can predict the outcome of situations before they happen and plan accordingly. Intelligence is also required when dealing with the cognitive load which they carry. It helps them to overcome this limiting factor without leaking their plans and/or intentions. 4.They are Confident Confidence is one of the most attractive and convincing human traits. Confidence is the ability to approach people and situations without fear or doubt. When someone comes up to us smiling and speaking fluently, we are more likely to listen to them. Conversely, if someone tries to talk to us, yet they are inaudible or shy, our attention and interest are lost. That said, a deceiver tries to be very confident when making their moves to minimize suspicion and improve their overall appearance. They seem to have satisfactory answers to everything. Confidence is very important to them because they also need to overcome their conscience, which might discourage them from taking advantage of others. 5.They are Eloquent Liars are either born with eloquence, or they practice it. They are said to be smooth, natural performers. During an interaction, they take charge and make the moment as lively as possible. They speak without stammering or hesitating even when talking about false things. Deceivers come off as excellent listeners as they know people are attracted to those who give them an ear. When it is their turn to speak, even after some doubt is cast, their wordplay 21/54 is powerful to the extent that it can make a lie to be acceptable. “Ers” and “Uhm” are never part of their vocabulary. 6.They are Keen Unknown to us, we have an innate gift of detecting suspicion when we have done something wrong. For instance, if we lie about our ages, we watch out for clues which may hint that the other party is not taking the lie. Some clues might be raising their eyebrows, looking at us from head to toe or throwing a sarcastic statement which seeks to doubt. Similarly, deceivers are overly keen. They know how to read verbal cues and body language. This skill is used to evaluate their progress, know when to change a narrative, or abandon the mission in general. 7.They have a Sharp Memory You have probably heard the saying that the disadvantage of lying is that you must force yourself to remember everything. A keen subject can detect a deceiver if they notice a conflicting narrative. To overcome this shortfall, deceivers have adapted by developing a sharp memory. If someone asks them about something, they had said priory, they give the exact sentiments. This single trait alone makes it hard for them to blunder and very hard for outsiders to detect their fallacies. 8.They Speak Half-truths The high intelligence that deceivers possess increases their prowess at misleading people. They understand that fabricating a lie from scratch is hard and is easier to be detected. Therefore, they resort to bending truths. A half-truth is more convincing as part of it can be verified. It also translates to less cognitive load since they only need to fabricate part of the story. For example, a retail store might announce a sale where they have slashed the prices of vegetables. While this might be true, they might as well be selling the vegetables cheaply since they are of inferior quality. To them, they have no remorse for selling bad groceries as long as they prevent losses at the expense of the customers. 9.They are Expressive A deceiver is bound to be someone who can express an idea in a way such that the recipient has no room for questions or doubts. They are good with detailing and articulating issues because a narrative that has no loopholes is easier to adopt. The expressiveness is deployed at their first interaction with the target as a way to create a good first impression. First impressions influence the way we see others. As such, if they make it worthwhile at first interaction, they make the target easier to influence due to their good image. False lovers are examples of expressive people. When asked why they love someone, they provide juicy reasons which convince their innocent others. 10. They are Rapid Thinkers The other trait that is commonly seen in liars is the ability to think fast. This is especially true with the deceivers who hunt for victims in public or when they have limited time. They have to come up with effective plans in the shortest way possible before their subjects disappear or become suspicious. Similarly, they also display rapid thinking when they are cornered or forced to make impromptu explanations. Some of them are professionals in the art of deception that they can come up with the most convincing statements in a short while. 22/54 Chapter 8 Dark NLP and Nonverbal Communication What is NLP? T o understand Dark NLP on a theoretical level, it is first necessary to understand the ideas of NLP upon which it is based. NLP began when two individuals, Bandler and Grinder, developed a set of ideas into human behavior and how it could be influenced that came to be known as neuro-linguistic programming, more commonly known as NLP. At first, the techniques were fairly unknown, but received wider exposure through the years through the work of superstars such as Tony Robbins and Derren Brown. Although more people than ever before have heard of NLP, very few know how to actually apply it. The basic concepts of NLP came from the modeling of human behavior combined with linguistic principles taken from academics such as Noam Chomsky. These two central influences are combined into a set of formal principles into the motivations of humans and how these can be influenced and modeled. One of the founders of NLP has summarized its area of focus as formalizing the concepts and principles which drive human behavior. NLP has three main areas through which its ideas are filtered - subjectivity, consciousness and learning. NLP teaches that there is no absolute, objective understanding of the world around us, yet instead every individual forms their own personal picture of the world which consists of the data taken in through the five senses as well as the language the person learns to attach to their sensory data. It is theorized that this combination of sensory input and descriptive language eventually leads to behaviors that are either effective according to our subjective map of the world, or maladaptive and harmful to our own aims and pursuits. One area in which NLP is relatively in agreement with mainstream psychology is its understanding of the human mind as having both a conscious and an unconscious dimension. Much of the teaching of NLP is predicated upon the belief that a lot of influence occurs at the subconscious level of human thought. People are vulnerable to being manipulated in ways they are not able to perceive. NLP sees people as behaving according to three key aspects - the ‘what’, the ‘how’ and the ‘why’. The ‘what’ focuses on the external behavior and physiology a person exhibits in a given situation, the ‘how’ deals with the internal thinking patterns the person has that govern their pattern of decision making, and the ‘why’ deals with the supporting beliefs, assumptions and values that point a person in one direction rather than another. If you are able to understand the aforementioned three aspects then you are able to effectively model the complete reality of someone else’s behavior. It should be stressed that it is the internal process that is being copied which leads to the external behavior, rather than just crudely mimicking the external behavior alone. Without the accompanying internal dimensions, the behavior is likely to come off as insincere and phony. NLP advocates going beyond passively accepting the various factors that compromise a person’s behavior. Instead, it advocates actively exploring and manipulating the variables at hand in order to understand the relationship between each, and which are essential to achieve the desired result. There is a clear contrast between the NLP model of understanding behaviors and the traditional view. Traditionally, people acquire a new behavior by acquiring one piece of a skill at a time, until they add up to form the entire behavior. NLP instead focuses on doing things the opposite way, meaning the person is initially presented with all of the components of a behavior at once, and then proceeds to subtract various parts until they are left with only the essential aspects. This process of simplifying behaviors and reducing them to only their crucial aspects is similar to business processes which aim to map out a series of steps and identify which are essential and which are not. In this sense, the process of refining behaviors through the application of NLP can be seen as a means of ensuring personal efficiency. NLP also concerns itself with the question of finding the difference between two types of people within any given field - those that succeed and those who do not. Success modeling seeks to find exactly what earlier successful people did in contrast from someone who failed in the same area of life. Did they think about the problem differently? Did they perceive decisions differently? Was there some behavioral habit that helped to make the difference to their results? The main outlook of NLP can therefore be summarized as identifying and simplifying the factors that lead to success in a given situation as a simple process model. When this model has been identified and simplified it can be applied to gain drastic results in a short period of time. This is because the years of experience that have led to successful people doing things a certain way can be quickly and painlessly adopted by anyone willing. This above understanding of NLP is essential to understanding Dark NLP, but it is only half of the equation. Equally important is the understanding of the dark psychological principles through which the traditional NLP outlook on human behavior is filtered. This unique system is able to combine the unfiltered truth of dark psychological insight with the manipulative efficiency of NLP to make a truly unique model of understanding. So, what are the main dark psychological concepts which bear influence upon NLP? One of the key ideas informing Dark NLP is that human beings lack any concrete identity and are therefore susceptible to the influence of others, for better or for worse. Traditional NLP takes this understanding of identity as being fluid and uses it as a basis for therapists to help people overcome the major roadblocks that are holding them back in life. According to Dark NLP, on the other hand, this fluidity of identity means that a person can be manipulated into behaving according to the will of others. This potential for malicious influence is evidenced by the people who fall under the spell of dark forces such as cults or extreme ideologies. What is Nonverbal Communication? Nonverbal communication refers to several different ways’ humans communicate without saying a word. Have you ever looked at someone and knew by the way their shoulders hunched over and their expression that they were extremely uncomfortable with whatever situation was happening around them? You recognize that discomfort simply at a glance due to your ability to read their body language. Ultimately, there are several different forms of nonverbal communication, all of which being beneficial when you are wanting to understand the truth behind what the other person is thinking or feeling. While there are others, many of the other forms, such as hand gestures, are much more contingent upon culture. If you are interested in learning more about reading gestures, however, you should absolutely look up a local guide to hand gestures in your country of origin. Expressions Expressions refer to the wide range of ways that faces move in order to express emotion. They are used to convey emotions most of the time, but they can also be used to show when someone is uncomfortable, lying, or even just not paying attention. Here are some of the most common facial expressions, as well as what some of the most common body language of the face implies. Universal Facial Expressions The universal facial expressions are a set of seven different expressions that people can understand and read, regardless of culture or how much or little they are raised with others. Even those who are born blind will still show 23/54 these facial expressions without having ever seen them before, leading psychologists to believe that these expressions absolutely are innate in human beings as a whole. These expressions are usually sorted out by the emotion they represent. Surprise: When someone is exhibiting surprise, they usually raise their eyebrows, with the centers raising higher than the edges, creating a rounded look, and also pushing up skin onto the forehead, creating wrinkles. The eyes are wide, with whites being flashed both above and below the iris. Oftentimes, the mouth is opened loosely and without tension. Fear: When afraid, people usually raise their eyebrow, but instead of them being rounded, they are instead relatively straight. The individual who is afraid will also show a wrinkled forehead in the center, typically between the eyebrows. They also usually show widened eyes, but the whites of the eye are seen from the top part of the eye and not the bottom. The mouth may be open slightly, with lips parted and pulled back with some tenseness. Disgust: When someone looks at something in disgust, usually the eyelids are raised up with the brows dropped lower. The nose is usually wrinkled while paired with a raised upper lip. The wrinkling of the nose usually causes lines underneath the eyes, at the top part of the cheek. Anger: Anger is quite easily recognized at a glance. When someone is angry, their brows are lowered and knitted together, creating wrinkles between the brows running vertically. The eyes stare harshly, with the lids tensed. The lips will be either sealed shut firmly, frowning, or wide open if yelling. Happiness: When genuinely happy, people usually smile. Their lips pull upward, and they sometimes flash their teeth while smiling. There is usually a discernable line running from the nose to the corners of the lips, and there should be creases around the eyes when genuinely happy. Sadness: When people feel sad, their eyebrows draw together, with the inner corners raising upwards, creating wrinkles between them. The lips are pulled downward in a frown, and the jaw is raised upwards. Oftentimes the lip is pushed outward in a pout. Contempt: Contempt is largely characterized by a neutral expression with the corner of the mouth raised on one side and a hard stare. 24/54 Chapter 9 Dark Hypnosis and Hypnotherapy Understanding Hypnosis H ollywood has done a poor job of educating the public about the facts of hypnosis. A different way of looking at it is this: Hollywood has done a spectacular job of brainwashing the public on what hypnosis is not. In many films, hypnosis involves a well-dressed therapist dangling a watch in front of the subject’s eyes. The subject is then transported into another realm, usually their past, where they are given commands to do things that they would otherwise not have agreed to. The only problem with this portrayal of hypnosis is that people are fearful of the process since it leads them to believe that hypnosis can only be carried out in a structured setting. In truth, hypnosis happens every day as we go about our usual lives. When you are engrossed in a really captivating manuscript, to the point where you become oblivious to your surroundings, you are under hypnosis. When a young child is playing with their imaginary friends, their brain is hypnotized. When you meet an extremely attractive person who captures all your conscious attention until your jaw is left hanging in awe, you may be said to be under hypnosis. There is a scientific explanation behind hypnosis. The human brain has a part that controls conscious thought and a part that is responsible for unconscious thought. Unconscious thought in this case includes memories. The unconscious thoughts that you have toward yourself are powerful as are the marks left behind by the experiences that you have gone through. For instance, if your last relationship was wrought with cheating and abuse, you may store these memories of pain and subconsciously shun relationships because you have grown to associate love with pain. Hypnosis works by eliminating the memories stored in the subconscious brain with better thoughts. Of course, the reverse may also be true especially in the case where a predator wants to replace happy memories with other negative thoughts that will wear down their prey. How to Hypnotize People Hypnosis is not reserved for the professionals. As you go about your daily life, you can make people do things for you through hypnosis. A great thing about hypnosis is that it is so subtle in its implementation that most people will just assume that you are charming. In fact, many people will never really figure out that they are hypnotized until it is too late. The precursor toward winning over someone by means of hypnosis is establishing a bond with the person. You are more likely to win over someone if you have made them feel safe and secure in your presence. A stranger on the train will be harder to hypnotize because they are closed off to you. However, smiling charmingly at the stranger may cause them to be more open to you and you can then begin your hypnosis. Disrupt Patterns Patterns are comforting to the human mind because they are familiar and predictable. That is why a lot of people love routine. With patterns, the brain does not require to utilize a lot of mental resources in critical thinking. Think of the patterns that you have in your life. This could be your bedtime routine, the meals you have for dinner or even a romantic routine that you share with your relationship partner. It could be something as simple as the way you answer your phone. Perhaps, your normal pattern is to say, “Hey, there,” and so your callers grow to anticipate this as the usual greeting. One of the simplest ways of hypnotizing someone is by throwing their minds into disarray by altering a pattern that they are used to. Let’s say you want to ask your spouse for a favor. On any day, you know that your spouse will refuse this favor because it is somewhat impractical. What is the best way to hypnotize them into agreeing to your request? Simply interrupt a pattern that the two of you have established. Following time your spouse calls you, forego the usual bland greeting and change into something more cheerful and more charming. Instead of simply saying, “Hey, Hun” as they expect, say something like, “Hello there, my love. I’ve really missed you.” Instantly, your spouse's brain will go into shock because this is not what it was expecting to hear. There will be a brief window of opportunity whereby your spouse’s brain is reorganizing itself to process this new pattern, and this is your chance to strike with a hypnotic command. More likely than not, your spouse will say yes to your command because their critical brain will be focused on figuring out what just happened. Zeigarnik Effect What happens when you complete a to-do list? Your brain completely forgets about these tasks and moves on to something else. What happens in the case where the tasks on the to-do list are still pending? In such a case, your attention will be drawn to the incomplete tasks that need to be finished. This phenomenon is known as the Zeigarnik effect. The Zeigarnik effect states that incomplete tasks command the attention of the brain more than complete ones. It is named after a Russian psychologist who got her inspiration from the concept through her professor. The professor observed that waiters had better memory of orders that were unpaid than those whose payment had been completed. Zeigarnik investigated this phenomenon and found it to be true. You can apply Zeigarnik’s effect to capture the attention of a person while directing them to do something else unconsciously. For example, you could tell your friend a story that is punctuated with pauses during which you ask them to do something for you. Their brain will be so fixated on your story that they will be acting on your commands as if in auto-pilot mode. Negative Vibes Only Psychologists have often said that the subconscious mind cannot interpret negative words. As such, anything negative that the subconscious brain hears is interpreted as a positive. For instance, telling someone, “I don’t need you” may be interpreted as “I need you” and so on. This makes it possible to make a request indirectly without worrying about coming across as demanding. If you want a friend to help you with something, consider phrasing it as if you don’t. Their brain will interpret this in the exact opposite way and your friend will come rushing to your help. Of course, it is important to make sure that your friend actually likes and cares for you in the first place. Choice of Words Imagination is a powerful tool in hypnosis. Getting the mind to conjure something that may or may not exist in real life is a sign of a great hypnotist. As much as possible, make use of words that transport the mind from the physical reality to a different place where the possibilities are endless. Marketing agencies already know this and that is why they are always telling you to imagine how your life can change if you make a particular purchase. A mind that is in the throes of imagination can be commandeered in whichever way that the hypnotist, who in this case is you, deems fit. Dress Well In hypnosis, first impressions matter almost as much as the methods you use. Your choice of dress is the first way of creating an illusion that people can buy into. People are constantly making assumptions about us based on the way we are dressed. If you want to come across as a trendy, stylish, and confident individual, you must acquire a wardrobe that conveys the same message. You will not hypnotize anybody in an old shirt and torn jeans because 25/54 your clothes will have already ruined your game of illusion. Hypnotherapy What Happens During Hypnotherapy? During a typical session of hypnotherapy, the therapist will begin evaluating the patient’s goals for treatment. Once you and the therapist are clear about the reasons for seeking hypnotherapy, he or she will begin talking in a calm, soothing, and gentle voice, usually describing images and scenes to help the patient relax and feel safe. This initial step is designed to create what is called a “receptive state” in the mind of the patient. Once the therapist sees you have attained this state of relaxation and receptivity, he or she will begin suggesting ways you might achieve your goals. These suggestions may include constructing visual images in your mind in which you see yourself successfully attaining the behavior or condition you have identified as your goal. For example, the session may begin with the therapist asking you to close your eyes, relax, and let go of any tension. Depending on the personal information you have shared with your therapist, they may then begin to suggest locations or events that you associate with feelings of safety, relaxation, and calm-maybe the beach or the ocean, a room in your home, or some type of music or activity. Once the patient has achieved a trance state, which is described as a state between sleep and wakefulness, the hypnotherapist can make suggestions. If the therapist suggests that you are eating a cheeseburger, you may experience the meal and taste of a cheeseburger, if the therapist suggests that your nose is heavily congested from a cold, you may alter your voice when you talk. Alternatively, the therapist may ask deep and probing questions about a sensitive area of your life that you normally are uncomfortable discussing. In a hypnotic state, you may find it much easier to open up. Throughout the session of hypnotherapy, the patient feels a complete lifting of inhibitions. He or she will be very suggestible and willing to act in ways that normally be embarrassing or uncomfortable. Yet, at no time does the patient lose consciousness or forget that he or she is engaged in a session with a hypnotherapist. The effectiveness of hypnotherapy lies in its ability to induce the patient to enter a state in which their inhibitions have been lowered so that the psychological defenses they have built up no longer prevent them from saying or doing things that can help them resolve their problem. With enough practice and training, many patients are eventually able to practice self- hypnosis as part of a program of ongoing self-care. Is Hypnotherapy Effective? Hypnosis is used in a fairly limited number of situations to help people cope with pain, stress, depression, grief, or anxiety; certain physical ailments like irritable bowel syndrome; overcome the effects of chemotherapy associated with cancer treatment; or to effect behavioral changes such as quitting smoking and losing weight. Generally, although hypnotherapy has been recognized as having valid and proven clinical results, it is still viewed as a supplementary or secondary line of treatment following a full program of psychotherapy or cognitive behavioral therapy. In addition, some people are more likely to benefit from hypnotherapy than others. People who exhibit higher levels of activity in the prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the parietal regions of the brain are more likely to be suggestible under hypnosis. These areas of the brain regulate functions such as memory, perception, emotions, and task learning. Overall, researchers have developed the following statistical analysis of the effectiveness of hypnosis in the general population: ● Approximately 15% of people report high degrees of responsiveness to hypnosis. ● Approximately 10% of adults are resistant to hypnosis or impossible to hypnotize. ● People who exhibit the capacity to indulge in fantasies generally experience more benefit from hypnosis. ● Children are usually easier to hypnotize than adults. Drawbacks of Hypnotherapy In certain cases, hypnosis may actually cause harm. For example, patients with symptoms of psychopathy or who experience hallucinations or delusions may be hard to control or may experience a worsening of their condition under hypnosis. Some psychiatric disorders may require the use of medication, and in these cases, hypnosis may be an ineffective treatment. Hypnosis is also not recommended for patients who are currently abusing substances or under the influence of drugs or alcohol. Patients who wish to use hypnosis as a method of pain control should be examined by a physician first to ensure they are not experiencing any serious problems that may require surgical or medical intervention. Finally, due to hypnotherapy’s ability to cause the patient to create false or fictitious memories or to experience strong emotions, using hypnosis to treat patients with serious psychological disorders, such as those outlined in the Dark Triad or other dissociative disorders, is generally regarded as potentially harmful and dangerous. 26/54 Chapter 10 Brainwashing and Mind Control Techniques Brainwashing T he first area that we want to look over is brainwashing. Brainwashing is defined as someone being pressured into doing something wildly different from their beliefs. This is often accomplished by persistence and oftentimes force. Obviously, avoiding the effects of brainwashing is important to each and every one of us. Some have found limited information of brainwashing happening in the early 20th century. However, it was not something that really had many people interested. It was not until quite a while far along that people started to see the true and terrifying nature of brainwashing. In the 1950’s the scare of brainwashing became a real thing. Other countries were using brainwashing techniques to control their soldiers. Basically, they were turning them into puppets that would do any and all things without question. America started to have true nerves about this when trusted military members started stating “truths” that were absolutely false. After this occurred, you found the words brainwashed and brainwashing everywhere. It is when it became a word that the world knew. It was cropping up all over American newspapers and there were more and more stories coming out about brainwashing and the things it could get you to do. Brainwashing, at this point, was almost entirely geared toward controlling governments. However, as time went on, people started to see that it was not only used in politics and war settings. They were seeing brainwashing happening all around them. The definition eventually led to include the thoughts of persuasion or propaganda to get people to purchase items or follow ideals of others. There are a variety of different ways that one may be brainwashed. Here again, some are easily recognizable while others are much more subtle. The in your face varieties are, obviously, easier to see and understand. This can involve things like hypnosis and isolation. The more subtle varieties are increasingly harder to see and protect yourself against. Hypnosis is the version of brainwashing that most people think of when they hear the word. It is a common practice to help change a behavior in someone. It can, obviously, be used to do very good things. Conversely, it can be used to completely destroy a person and make them do things completely against their nature. Hypnosis can be accomplished in a variety of different ways. Typically, there will be a repetitive noise that just about matches a heartbeat. The tone of the hypnotist’s voice and the surroundings in the room will also play a role. All of these things are used to cause a trance-like state in the person being hypnotized. From there, once trance state is gained, there is very little that a skilled hypnotist can’t get you to do. Another way that people brainwash others is by playing on our own vulnerabilities. Peer pressure is a type of brainwashing. When you make someone feel less than the crowd, they become vulnerable and easily manipulated due to the drive to want to fit in. This can be seen all over the world and in just about every age group. As humans, we have an inane need to fit in. Confusion Doctrines and Metacommunication are also ways that people have been able to brainwash others. By putting together lectures and written materials that are hard to understand but have a consistent and clear message, you can make people believe a different way. Their acceptance of the clear messages is more easily absorbed due to the fact it’s the only piece of what is being said that is understood. Verbal and physical abuse are also ways that someone could brainwash another. By tearing someone down, they become more accepting of other beliefs. Oftentimes, the abuser will also be the one to “build them back up”. This causes an odd sense of adoration from the person being abused to the abuser. People are also known to be controlled by measures of isolation, fear, or guilt. Unfortunately, there are a huge variety of techniques that people may use to try and brainwash another person. For most of us, we will never experience these darker ways of brainwashing, however, we do experience some of it on a daily basis. Companies use brainwashing techniques to encourage consumers to buy their products. Have you ever gotten the jingle for a commercial stuck in your head and no matter what you do you can’t get it out? Well, this is a form of brainwashing. It is sticking an idea in your head that you just can’t shake, even if it is about a product you don’t want. As it continues to sit and fester in your mind, there is a better likelihood that you will head out and give their product a try. Not only do we find this happening in commercials but also in print ads, catch phrases, and company logos. Everything a brand does to get you to buy their products is, for all intents and purposes, brainwashing. Making you believe you will be happier, healthier, or more productive by using whatever it is they have to offer, even if there is no truth to it at all. Being aware of the fact that brainwashing is all around you is the first step in making sure that you are thinking for yourself. Propaganda is everywhere and so is the influence of other people whether average everyday people or political figures. Know that most people have an agenda. Recognizing brainwashing tactics isn’t always difficult but it can be hard to avoid. People that fall into the dark triad will frequently try and brainwash their victims. This is perfectly clear with our example of Jim Jones. His cult was enthralled by him even though he had malicious intent. It is not surprising that egomaniacs want to have control of those around them and they will use any means necessary to get it. Including but not limited to brainwashing. As more learning in the realm of Dark Psychology happens, the newer tactics of brainwashing are uncovered. Knowledge is absolutely, power. So, learning more about what people are doing to control other minds can help to keep us all safer from this detrimental tactic in the future. Mind control techniques 1. Gaslighting This is the technique that is used to see if the person’s words sound like his actions or not. The gaslighting is a method that can be used to question the belief of the personality and with the passage of time, the person has to understand the use of this tool to use the manipulation effectively. There is a set of questions among the public, used by the manipulator to dodge the essence of the questions and with the passage of time, the entire scenario of the public changes with time all because of the gas questions, asked by the manipulator. 2. Generalizations The generalizations of a manipulator are a strong sense of demotivation for the public to withstand. The manipulator easily generalizes all the terms and tactics that are employed on a social, economic and political factor and with the passage of time, the generalizations come with time. The generalizations are important enough for a manipulator for the student to understand the essence of all compatible reasons for the public and with the passage of time, the manipulator is able to see the distance of the public go far away. Therefore, the distance of the public from the real 27/54 cause actually defines the status of the manipulator and with the manipulator can control a lot of sense through it. Therefore, the use of a generalizing matter creates more and more aspect for the students and civilians. Thus, the use of generalization gives impetus to the manipulator and with the passage of time, it can be more asserted in the coming. So, generalization can lead to a lot of trouble and menace for the student. 3. Moving the goal post The manipulators have every right to deny your goal and ambition. They call it the moving of goal post and this is how the public is able induce bad and obscene mechanism to it. The goal post is the ambition of every man to cater to the fundamentally obsessed question of the incident and with the passage of time, the manipulator tends to de-track you from the quest at the earliest. The track is therefore a sense of motivation for you and you do not get enough style of aspiration for the students and civilians. The idea is quite simple that the public are able to create more satisfaction for the public and with the passage of time, the manipulators induce havoc as well. 4. Changing the subject The manipulator would do his best in changing the subject. This aspect makes avoid accountability of his prior actions and with the passage of time, he learns the act of treachery and deception. Any time or anyplace, where he is not able to see the masterpiece of the subject, he tends to foil with the public and therefore, he is not even governing to the matter of the public so that he could not even to the matter of appreciation. Thus, changing the subject of any conversation is also a tool of manipulation that is required by all means necessary. 5. Name-calling Name-calling is an art and tactic that can be used to induce marginalization in the incident and with the passage of time, it could lead to dilemmas and destruction. The name-calling starts with a mode of aspiration for the pupils but ends in utter destruction for the public. This concept can be easily seen in many areas and portions of the world and such a practice can induce horror and terror in the region. This practice of name-calling can be used in the factors that enable one with destruction and devastation. 6. Smear Campaigns This campaign is used to address the horrendous use of psychology for the public. This is a play in which you are the victim and they are the martyr. According to them, you have displayed a sense of bad relationship to them and for that mere reason they have labeled you as a dead person. You no longer have a sense of reputation in the system and every time you encounter them, they tend to call you bad and the gone one. This aspect has many difficulties for you and end up being a psychopath. This aspect has emotional issues for you, psychological issues for you, ovulational and many more. Therefore, smear campaigns are personally made to make you feel bad and obscene and with the passage of time, you feel very hectic. 7. Devaluation This devaluation is not the currency devaluation, but it is the human devaluation of yourself, you tend to be very bad and obsolete in your character that you embarrass every one’s exes. You will as it is your pertinent duty to make the lives and ages of others feel embarrassing and with the passage of time, you control over your anger just to inflict punishment among the others. For instance, there was a time when people were able to cooperate with one another and could not try to defame others. However, with the burgeoning social media, people tend to decide the relationship of others by making them feel very degenerate. This is the crucial aspect of psychology, which could be very tumultuous for you and with the passage of time, he felt very bad and worse. Therefore, devaluation is meant to be an outlet of Mind Control and it can be very harmful for anyone, who does it. 8. Aggressive Jokes Aggressive Jokes are the modes to make others look small and in shambles. These jokes could be of anything like the jokes on individuality, the jokes on society and the jokes on caste. These jokes impose derogatory remarks on the individuals and with the passage of time, the individuals feel very bad about them. The idea is simply that the psychology believes that manipulators could be worst nightmares for innocent personalities. People can use the edifice of others to personally sabotage the concept of friendliness and equality among the persons and with the passage of time, the people tend to showcase a system of defamation among others. Thus, aggressive jokes can be bad and hazardous for others. 9. Triangulation This is the concept, in which the individuals tend to use the supposed threat of others to manipulate the innocents. Suppose there are three individuals in a room, two of them are having an argument about anything and the person sitting subsequent to them is of a high caste. The manipulator would use the edifice of supposed threat of the third person to deter that of a second person and with the passage of time, the concept of triangulation would be bolstered. Hence, the use of force and manipulation is done in order to make the third parties very bad and degenerate. 10. Use of tools These are sensory devices, visual sensor, automatic assembly, industrial manipulator and photoelectric detector. These tools cast a shadow of degeneration among the personalities and with the passage of time, the people are able to have list of traumata embedded in them. Therefore, with the passage of time the tools can be used for a stringent version of collaboration. 28/54 Chapter 11 Dark Games and More Subtle Advanced Techniques W hen a person plays “mind games” on us, it is attributed to being innocent. Many people have come across this at some point in their life. Take an example when someone is planning a surprise party and doesn’t want the other person to know and he does this by playing mind tricks in order not to give away what the surprise actually is. This is merely considered innocent and silly. Dark psychology mind games are not in any way innocent. Mind games in dark psychology are attributed to the hypnotist toying with the will power and sanity of his victim. This differs from other dark psychological manipulation in the sense that the manipulator is playing with his victim for his own pleasure and enjoyment and is not invested in what the outcome will be. His interest in the victim would be to test the victim so to speak. Mind games are used by a hypnotist when other forms of suggestions to the victim are not effective and may decide to use mind games which are rather less obvious to the audience. The manipulator may decide to use mind games to his own pleasure and amusement. Mind games are very effective in reducing the assuredness and psychological strength of the victim. The victim is eluded into thinking that he still has control. Manipulators are able to satisfy their twisted amusement when playing mind games. Such dark psychological manipulators do not see their victims as equal human beings and instead chooses to see the victim as a ‘toy’ and a person who can be manipulated and therefore, watch with amusement when victims do what they tell them to. Sometimes, a dark manipulator will have known mind games all his life and knows no other forms of dark psychology manipulation. These manipulators can be dangerous because they know not of any other option and therefore no need of changing and being more humane. Let us dive into the specific types of mind games used by dark manipulators. Ultimatum An ultimatum can be defined as a final proposition or condition. One, therefore, is presented with a severe choice. They are viewed more as demands other than a request. An example is, “Be more outgoing...or I will see other people”. Certain factors will decide whether an ultimatum will be considered as a mind game. The three factors are one, the type of person giving the ultimatum, second the intention for giving the ultimatum and lastly the nature of the ultimatum. Persons who give ultimatums and genuinely care about the persons and have a valid reason for doing so, and then it will fall under the non-dark manipulation. These persons will generally include spouses, parents, siblings or close relatives. However, if they fall into any of the categories mention it does not necessarily rid them of dark intentions from the ultimatum given. What was the intention of the person giving the ultimatum? People with good intentions are often driven by the desire to help or assist in bettering the life of a person. Where a person gives an ultimatum to for example stop smoking or drinking too much, then this seen as good intentions. Being able to tell the intention of an ultimatum is difficult and so looking at the nature of the ultimatum itself is the surest way to be able to tell whether it is dark. Dark manipulative ultimatums will involve the person doing something that goes against what they stand for and goes against what their self-interest. The victim ends up comprising their moral standards in the process. Manipulators test their victims to see how far they go in compromising what they believe in. As we have seen, non-dark ultimatums are usually to benefit another person and the does not have to go against what they know is wrong. What is a dark psychological ultimatum? The person giving the ultimatum will be a friend, a boss or a person who the victim is in a toxic relationship with. It could also the form of a spouse, a parent or a sibling. The manipulator will often give ultimatums that go against the victim’s moral conviction or that which can possibly be dangerous to the victim. Here, the dark manipulator will notice a disinclination towards something and take advantage of this to make their victim do their bidding. An example will be a girl who is not comfortable in wearing costumes or revealing clothes. Some of the ultimatums will be, “It’s an only costume party, it is either you wear one or you are not invited”. Some ultimatums lead to harm to others such as assault and even murder. At very extreme cases, the victim ends up taking his own life in completing a suicide pact in which the manipulator does not honor his end. The External Break up Everybody likes to be in a relationship where there is that sense of security and knowing that your partner is content. A manipulator will know this but will use these for their dark intentions. A manipulator will ensure that their partner will be powerless by instigating feelings of instability, and negativity within their relationship. This technique of ‘The External Break up’ is often deployed in a romantic relationship. It manifests itself when a partner continuously to scares the other that he or she will leave them. This is aimed at creating feelings of anxiety and instability within the relationship. This mind game takes the form of promised breakups, implied breakups and actual breakups that do not happen. Implied breakups are those that are not expressly stating the words ‘break up’. Instead, the manipulator throws hints there and then to create some doubt in the partner’s mind. They can do this by making statements that exclude their partner from future plans together. Promised breakups happen where the dark manipulator scares their partner that they instead to break up with them somewhere in the near future. Words like, “Don’t worry I won't have to deal with this anymore because I’ll be leaving soon” show the intention of a breakup in the future. Promise breakups fall in between the implied breakups and the actual breakups. Where the dark manipulator mentions the idea of cutting ties with their partner, either by divorcing, separating or breaking up, but does not follow through then it calls under the promised breakup. The actual break is the most severe compared to the implied and promised breakups. It happens when the manipulator decides to leave their victim without actually leaving in the end. They may pack up their clothes and belongings in the attempt to leave but once they see the sadness all over their victim’s face, the decide otherwise. After going through and understanding the tactic of the “external break up” we ask ourselves what therefore is the end game for manipulator when they use this tactic? The manipulator aims at having the upper hand in the relationship by creating feelings of uncertainty and lack of security from the life of the victim and therefore reducing their power in the hands of the manipulator. By repeatedly simulating a breakup with the victim, the manipulator is trying to test the waters of how far one will go in putting up with being treated like a toy. In the end, when the manipulator gives in to the victims’ begging for the relationship to continue, they make themselves look like the generous ones. This works so well for the manipulator because his or her victim is not thinking rationally to be able to figure out why they relationship should end. They are therefore willing to continues with the relationship. Many people do not understand this concept of dark psychology and why a person would want to continue to be in a relationship with a dark manipulator in the first place. The impact of this on the victim includes the likelihood of developing serious trust issues where they will have a hard time trusting another person. This could take a toll on the victim’s professional relationships and family relationships as well. After a long period of constant threats, the victims become almost like a slave to the manipulator in which the manipulator eventually grows tired and moves on to their following prey. Hard to get 29/54 And just like ultimatums, the hard to get tactic can easily pass off as being normal. Hard to get can be dark as it can be also harmless and normal. Hard to get when it is harmless it occurs when a person will want to make them seem trying to be with them is not as easy. They will do this by making themselves less available by not making to every date and leaving the phone to ring a couple of time before finally picking up. The ‘hard to get’ dark psychology is much riskier. The manipulator will use this tactic during the relationship rather than at the beginning of the relationship. Unlike the innocent hard to get where the intention is to eventually be in a happy relationship, dark psychology hard is far from taking into account the wellbeing of the victim. When used at the beginning of the relationship it is innocent because no expectations are infringed at this point. At this point, no one is dependent or reliant on either of the person, so no harm comes from playing hard to get. Further along in a relationship when things are going on well then suddenly a person is unreliable and often times tries to make themselves busy. This kind of behavior is not normal because relationships are about making and spending time with each other as this will firm up the relationship. A manipulator will be very cunning and start pulling away when their partner us already reliant on them. The victim will therefore put an extra effort to reconnect with their partner. In the end, the manipulator has the upper hand and will use this power to his or her own purpose while the victim is left in deep confusion and instability. 30/54 Chapter 12 How to Protect Yourself Against Emotional Predators Dealing with Manipulators Y ou can come across manipulators in all aspects of your life, both professional and personal. Whether you want to believe it or not, even those you love the most and hold dear can be manipulators. You might have to deal with manipulative partners, manipulative parents, or even manipulative coworkers. Regardless of the manipulator, you are dealing with; you can use the tips given in this segment to deal with manipulation and manipulative people. It isn't always easy, but you must learn to do so. After all, you are the only one who is responsible for your overall wellbeing. Basic Fundamental Rights A fundamental right is inalienable, and no one can take it away from you. This is one thing you must keep in mind whenever you come across any person who is a psychological manipulator. You must not only recognize your rights but must also prevent the violation of these rights. As long as you don't harm others, you must stand up for yourself and protect your rights at all costs. If you knowingly harm someone, you may lose some of these fundamental rights. Here are a couple of basic human rights you must be aware of. ● You have the right to be treated with dignity and respect. ● You are free to express your opinions, feelings, desires, and wants. ● You are free to set your priorities, and no one can force you to do something. ● You don't have to feel guilty when you say "no." ● You have the right to set specific boundaries for yourself. ● You have the right to have different opinions, and you don't have to agree with everyone. ● You not only have a right, but an obligation to safeguard yourself mentally, emotionally, and physically. All these fundamental rights define your boundaries. You must not only enforce your limitations on others but must also respect them yourself. Of course, you'll come across people who don't respect your rights. Especially those who resort to psychological manipulation, strive to deprive others of their rights so that they can exert control over you. However, keep in mind, you have the power to decide what you want to do, and you are the only one in charge of your life. Maintain Some Distance A manipulator often puts up a façade for the world to see and doesn't let his true intentions rise to the surface. A simple way to detect or spot a manipulator is to see the way he acts in front of different people and various situations. Most of us tend to exhibit social differentiation to a certain degree; emotional predators and psychological manipulators tend to dwell on the extreme ends of the spectrum. An emotional manipulator can be extremely polite one instant and unnervingly hostile the following. If you notice this kind of behavior from anyone in your circle, maintain your distance. If you cannot get away from such a person or avoid social interactions, then limit your interactions. Spend as little time dealing with such a person as possible. Even being around them will hurt you in ways you cannot begin to comprehend. You don't have to worry about being responsible for their feelings. If the manipulator tries to make you feel guilty for maintaining your distance, it is a part of his manipulative nature, and you're not obligated to fix them. So, stay away. No Personalization A manipulator is continuously going to look for your weaknesses, and once he understands them, he will exploit them. Therefore, he might try to make you feel inadequate, doubt your sanity, and question your judgment. If you experience any of these feelings, then it means the manipulator has a stronghold over you. Don't ever blame yourself in such situations because it only increases the power the manipulator has. In such instances, remind yourself, you are not the problem, and there is nothing wrong with you. Take a moment to think about the relationship you share with the manipulator and answer the following questions. ● Does this person seem to have unreasonable demands and expectations from me? ● Does he treat me with the respect I deserve? ● Is this relationship well-balanced, or does it only favor him? ● Does this relationship make me feel good about myself? If your answer is in the affirmative, then there is nothing wrong with the relationship. However, if it isn't, then you are in a relationship with a manipulator. Your answers to these questions will give insight into the kind of person you're dealing with. So, stop blaming yourself, and instead look at the other person. Probing Questions A psychological manipulator will inevitably start making requests. These requests are subtly veiled demands. Often the claims made will be such that you are required to go out of your way to meet his needs. If the claim you're presented with seems to be unreasonable, it's time to shift the attention back onto the manipulator by asking a couple of questions. By doing this, you can judge for yourself whether the person has sufficient self-awareness to realize the unreasonableness of his demands. Here are a couple of probing questions you can ask. ● Is this a request or a demand? ● What will I get if I fulfill this? ● Does this sound fair to you? ● Does this seem reasonable? ● Do you expect me to (restate the demand) do this? By asking such probing questions, you are placing a mirror in front of the manipulator to check his true nature and intentions. If the manipulator has even a little self-awareness, he will quickly withdraw his demand or even apologize for it. However, it is quite unlikely that an emotional predator will have any awareness about the unreasonableness of his request and might expect you to comply regardless. If the manipulator tries to turn the tables on you and say you are overreacting or are being unreasonable, steer clear of him. Either way, you have your answer. Time Is Your Ally Not only will the manipulator make unreasonable demands but will also expect an immediate answer. By doing this, he is trying to maximize the stress placed on you to exert a higher degree of control over you and on the situation. In such instances, don't play right into the manipulator's trap and buy yourself some time. A suitable response is, "I will get back to you soon," or "I will need to think about it." If you don't respond to this demand immediately, you are preventing him from controlling you. Once you have sufficient time, and can carefully analyze the situation along with its pros and cons. If you feel like it is an unreasonable demand, then you have the right to say "no." Saying "NO" A lot of people often struggle with saying "no." You must not only be firm while declining a request but must also do it diplomatically. After all, you do want to prevent the manipulator from creating an unnecessary scene, don't you? You have the right to say "no," and don't let anyone take this away from you. If you allow someone else to control your 31/54 actions like a puppeteer, you are giving away your power to choose. You can say "no" whenever you want to, and you don't have to feel guilty about it. Don't let the manipulator shame you or make you feel guilty for not complying with his demands. Confrontation An emotional predator, like a manipulator or a narcissist, is essentially a bully. While dealing with a bully, keep in mind that they are often targeting those whom they perceive to be weak or soft targets. As long as you don't take any action, stay compliant, and passive, the bully will always have some control over you. A lot of bullies put up a facade of courage and are often cowardly on the inside. So, once a target starts disobeying them or not complying with their request, bullies tend to back down. This stands right not just for a bully in school, but also in a personal or professional environment. If you ever decide to confront a bully, ensure that you are in a safe and secure environment. Make sure the bully cannot harm you and if required, opt for public confrontations. Having a couple of witnesses around you will be quite helpful. If you need help, ask for it and don't try to do everything by yourself. Importance of Consequences You must not only establish certain boundaries but must also set consequences for the violation of those boundaries. Whenever you feel like someone is violating your limitations, you must deploy a result. This is an important skill, especially while dealing with tricky and unscrupulous individuals. At times, regardless of all that you do, being around a manipulator can cause irreparable damage to your overall wellbeing. In such instances, you might have to sever all ties and run in the opposite direction. If that's what you need to do for your wellbeing, then don't hesitate. You owe it to yourself, and you deserve better than being manipulated. So, don't sell yourself short and don't subject yourself to manipulative abuse. 32/54 Chapter 13 Toxic Relationships and How to Deal with Them T he ideal goal of someone who is a manipulator is to get into a relationship with their target, one they can maintain for a long term, and that they can have full control over the other person. This is a very unhealthy relationship to deal with because it is just going to benefit the manipulator and not the target in any manner. A healthy relationship is going to involve an equal amount of giving and take between the people who are in it. But if you are in a relationship where it feels like you are always the one giving, and never actually receiving something, you may be in a relationship that has someone who is manipulative in it. A manipulative relationship is going to be really tough to identify because the manipulation is going to be more subtle compared to some of the other relationship types that are toxic. Psychological manipulation can happen when one person tries to create a power imbalance in the hopes of exploiting another person. Manipulation is going to have several methods that it can manifest, but the one theme that is going to keep on showing up between them all is that one person, the manipulator, is going to be the one who benefits, and the other person, the victim, is not and may even get harmed. There are a lot of times when someone is going to end up in a toxic relationship, and not even realize it. The relationship may have started out perfectly normal, without any of the drama or the issues that you will far ahead have to face when dealing with the manipulator. This is going to be part of the process that comes with the manipulator because it allows them to get in with target, and take control, without the other person realizing. Of course, the relationship is not going to start out with the drama or the drain on self-confidence or any of the other tactics that the manipulator is going to use soon. If they started out with this, then the target would see right through them in the beginning and would run the other way. the manipulator is going to take a different approach. One that is slower and more thought out. In the beginning, they will have no problem with love bombing and showing lots of affection. When the target is invested in the relationship, and often in love, then the manipulator will start to switch tactics. This will not be overnight and can take place over many weeks so that the target doesn’t really notice the changes until it is too late. By this point, the target is so invested in what is happening in the relationship and around them that they will tolerate more of the manipulation and the problems than they would in the past. There are actually a few different signs that can come up that show a manipulator may be at work in your own relationship. If you are uncertain about whether someone in your relationship is toxic and causing problems for you, or if they are a manipulator, it is important to take a look for these signs: They push you to go out of your comfort zone in many different manners. The manipulator is going to do this financially, physically, and emotionally in order to make sure their target is off balance. This allows the manipulator to be the one with the upper hand, and then they can be the one in control along the way. They will try to get rid of your confidence. When we start to have low self-confidence, we are going to be more easily manipulated because we are looking for ways to make ourselves feel better. This is why a manipulator is so interested in chipping away at our confidence levels to make us feel smaller and like we are never good enough. The manipulator can take our vulnerability and use it to their advantage. The silent treatment. This is where the manipulator is going to take any small slight that you do, and turn it into a big deal. And to punish the target, they are going to use the silent treatment and ignore them. This includes all emails, chances of talking, phone calls, messages, and more. The manipulator gets to maintain all of the control with this, and they will decide when the silent treatment is done. The guilt trips. None of us want to feel guilty about something, and if we are feeling this guilt, then we are going to do every action we can think about in order to make that guilt go away. The manipulator is counting on this and will throw as much blame and guilt on the target as they can, even blaming the target for things that they had nothing to do with. They will ignore or gloss over problems that are unresolved. Unhealthy relationships are going to thrive with lots of unresolved conflicts because there is no communication, or because the manipulator will deliberately not want to solve these conflicts. This is because manipulating you into thinking that the discussion was over and done with is going to be easier and more convenient for them than working to resolve that problem with you in the first place. Now, we can imagine that this is not that healthy of a relationship type to be dealing with. None of us want to get caught up in this kind of relationship where we feel trapped and like the other person is always in control, taking advantage of us and doing what they want in the process. We want to be able to have control over our own lives. And we want to find a partner who is willing to let this happen, without taking full advantage of us in the process. Before we go too far into all of this though, there are a few questions that we need to ask ourselves in order to help establish were we stand in a relationship if we think our partner is a manipulator. The questions that you should ask yourself here include: Am I being respected? Are the expectations and the requests set upon me by my partner reasonable? Would I let someone else give me these same requests and be fine with it? Is the giving and the receiving equal in the relationship? You don’t have to go out and do a tally sheet, but there shouldn’t be an obvious disparity here. Do you feel good about yourself when you are around this person? By the time we have gone through this guidebook, you should already be pretty sure about whether your relationship is a manipulative one or not. If you are in one of these types of relationships, some of the things that you can do to protect yourself include: Know your rights. If you have been in this kind of relationship for a long period of time, it is sometimes hard to remember how to stand up for yourself. Remember that, no matter what the manipulator has said to you, you do have some fundamental rights that need to be respected. These rights include the right to have others treat you with respect, the right to express some of your own feelings, needs, and opinions, the right to set your own priorities without someone else controlling you, and the right to tell another people no. It is also your right to have an opinion that is different than another person, to help make sure you are protected physically, mentally, and emotionally, and that you are able to have your own life apart from someone else if you choose. These are rights that the manipulator is going to try and take away from you in the long term. This allows them to 33/54 maintain the control that they want and will ensure that you are able to do what they say. But the following time that you are around your partner who is a manipulator, remember your own rights, take in a deep breath, and then try to execute them. You are the only one who gets to be in control of your life. Stay away. The following thing that you need to focus on doing here is to stay away from the other person. It is always best if you can keep your distance from someone who is manipulative. If it is too late for this one, see if you can at least get a bit of distance between the two of you. Every time that you do need to have some engagement with someone who is manipulative, you are simply giving them another chance to learn about you, figure out your weaknesses, and find a way to get into your life. Staying away from this person is the first and the best way to protect yourself from someone who is manipulative. If you start to feel some kind of impulse to try and help them, run the other way. Remember that the manipulator wants you to fall for this, and they want you to feel bad for them so that they can get you back into the relationship and can take advantage of you again. Remember your own worth and stay away from the manipulator, and don’t fall for the trap of wanting to feel bad for them or wanting to help them. Remember that it is not your fault. One thing that a manipulator is going to work with is trying to look for the best ways to exploit the weaknesses that you have. When the manipulator finds what these weaknesses are, they are going to be able to take full advantage of these and will use it against you. This makes it easier to feel inadequate and the target will often end up blaming themselves on a regular basis for how much you end up disappointing the manipulator. The manipulator does this on purpose. They know that you are going to be looking for ways to avoid guilt. And they know that they can always move the goalposts so that no matter how hard you work, and how long you work for it, you will never meet the standards that are set. This allows them to keep control the whole time, and to take advantage of their target for as long as possible. 34/54 Chapter 14 Secrets for Speed Reading and Analyzing People A gain, this is a practice, so after you finish this, you're not going to be an expert right away who can just say anything, anytime and pick up immediately what somebody else is feeling. You will need to get out there and apply it in real-life situations so that you can go through proper trial and error periods. It's best not to overthink things, but at the same time, don't make the same silly mistakes that other individuals might. Picking Up on Energy Some individuals claim that they're just outstanding in general at picking up on different people's body language. They might say that they can sense other people's energy, or that they know how to give off good energy themselves. While it might sound like mystical Voodoo, they aren't always necessarily wrong. Some people just are better at picking up on different people's body languages. Somebody's energy isn't just some aura that they have. In a sense, it could be. Maybe one day, we will discover scientific evidence to prove the aura of a person or a color that might radiate off of them. Aside from this, however, a lot of what makes up a person's energy is the way that they express their thoughts and emotions through their body language. You might be able to pick up on some of these energies better the more you practice speed reading other people's body language. What we always have to remember is that it is a cluster of actions that are going to give us the best insight into how and why somebody is using their body. Ensure that you look at every little thing that they are doing from the tip of their toes to the top of their heads. What are they trying to tell you with their body language? What might they be signaling by using these different parts? Is there a deeper truth that they are trying to say to you? At the same time, don't always overlook different aspects of their life. They might have just had a horrible day, maybe they're just a generally stressed out and an anxious person, or they can have incredibly low self-esteem that keeps them closed off. Somebody's energy is going to be often revolved around the thoughts and feelings that they have, but at the same time, we have to keep in mind what their general personality might reveal about the way that they communicate. When you hear somebody say that you have good energy or somebody they know has good power, look at what this person has with their communicative abilities that give you better insight into why people might feel this way. Pick up on people's energy by paying attention to what their body language does for other people. Notice if somebody might feel uncomfortable by a particular member of your group. For example, maybe there's that one guy at the office that just always comes around and seems to make people annoyed with his presence. Perhaps he always inserts himself into people's offices and just generally doesn't know when to stop talking. What is it about his body language and his communicative skills overall that might make him have a quote-unquote, lousy energy? We also have to consider the way that somebody might be able to clear a room. Have you ever noticed if an individual walked into a room and everybody else managed to leave? What is it about them that makes them seem as though they have bad energy? Maybe they have just really low self-esteem. Individuals who show that they continuously lack confidence in their body can drive people away, simply because they don't seem like they're worth anybody's time. If you can't be comfortable in your skin, how can you expect anybody else to be comfortable subsequent to you? Remember that this is an art that you must master, so not everything that you discover right away is necessarily the truth. But the more that we pay attention to picking up on people's body language, the easier it's going to be to know what they might be trying to tell us through these movements. Important Listening Skills While it's good to study people's bodies, we have to remember that we still need to listen to their words. Listening can be very challenging for many individuals, a part of why people struggle so much with listening is because they often plan out what they're going to say subsequently. Rather than actively listening to what a person might be saying now. Make sure when you are listening to others you take it moment by moment; don't get hung up on trying to read their body language as they're actively telling you something. You don't want to ignore them or miss out on important information because you can't stop figuring out why they're twitching their foot. A part of speed reading is always going to be able to look at everything at once, rather than spending too much time on all aspects. Think of yourself as a multitasker. By analyzing, make a judgment of their body language. First, let them talk and then analyze their body language. Afterward, do it all quickly and don't try to spend your entire time analyzing or else you're going to miss out on what this person might be trying to share The best skill that you will have will be to honestly listen to what they're saying and hear the words as they leave their mouth and enter your mind. Notice the way that they're holding their face so you can get a deeper understanding of what they're trying to say. Think about the things that they might be keeping from you what might they actually are thinking, versus what thoughts are portraying to the words that they say. Knowing body language will help you be a better listener as well, but always remember that listening is simple. Just keep your ears open and hear what they have to say. Signals in Voice Aside from their vocalization and their body language, we also have to remember that there are going to be signed in people's voices that give us better insight into the things that they're trying to say. For example, some individuals might talk at a high-pitched tone and a little bit faster. Others might be deep talkers who drag their words out. We can also change the way that we share words. Each time when somebody who is fast-talking is going to be more excited and focused on the moment than an individual with a slower and deeper tongue who is likely a little bit more disconnected, or perhaps they're simply tired. Notice if anybody seems to have a sudden pitch change when they're talking about a word. Maybe they are trying to emphasize an idea to you, they might highlight this word to using their voice, they can make it louder, or they could drag the word out. While it's important to listen to their words, and what they're saying, we have to know how they're saying it. Are they whispering certain parts as well? Are they emphasizing one sentence while trying to keep the others covered up? Maybe there's something that they don't want to fully share with you so instead of talking at the same pitch the whole time they emphasize the good and try to make the bad seem less important. Take note of the words that they emphasize, and the speed at which they share with you. This will reveal how focused and dedicated they are to sharing this information. Quick Tricks for Speed-Reading and Avoiding Body Language Mistakes We have just a couple quick tips for you before you go out in the world and get started. The first tip is to make sure that you pay attention to your own body language. The more that you focus on yourself, the easier it will be to fully understand how and why somebody might be doing a certain thing with their body. When we talk about body language, everybody assumes that it's time just to start analyzing the other person while overlooking themselves in the process. We cannot forget the way that we're using our bodies. One of the easiest 35/54 ways for you to learn is through yourself first, in all areas of study. Make sure that your first step in this process is to notice your body language. What do you commonly do with your feet? Why do you move your legs? Why do you sit in that certain position? What feels most comfortable to you? How are you trying to convey certain messages through your own body language? The second tip, we are going to give you is to limit yourself as you are analyzing. It is very tempting to sit there and pick apart every single movement that somebody makes like you are studying them as if they were a science experiment. Try to resist the urge to look over everything that you're trying to figure out about somebody. It's straightforward to take things very harshly and assume that somebody is trying to say something to their body language, but we can't always observe what messages they're trying to share. We will often look for science to validate the thoughts we already have. Rather than letting this control your life and your body language plan, make sure to consider that you might simply be thinking about it too much. Limit yourself by giving yourself just a quick 30 seconds to pick up on their body language. Then move on, focus on something else, and go back to it in a minute. Take in their signals in small instances, rather than long dragged out study times. This will make your perception altered because rather than listening to their words, you're going to be too focused on what they're trying to say with their body, rather than getting the actual reading that you need from them. You're going just to keep searching more profound and deeper for more signals that you are going to try to use to validate all the different thoughts you might have. How to Analyze People Though it may sound intimidating, learning to analyze other people is not nearly as difficult as it may initially seem. There are no complicated rules that you need to memorize or any skills that you need to learn-all you have to do is learn the pattern of behaviors and what they mean. This is because once you know the behaviors, you can usually start to piece together the intent behind the behaviors. You can begin to find out exactly what it is that someone’s eyes narrowing means and then begin to identify it with the context of several other actions or behaviors as well. You can find out what is intended when someone’s speech and their body language do not match up. Body language rarely lies when people are unaware of how it works, so you can often turn to it for crucial information if you are interacting with other people. The reason this works to understand people is because it is commonly accepted that there is a cycle between thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Your thoughts create feelings, and the feelings you have automatically influence your behaviors, as you can see through body language. Most of the time, this is an entirely unconscious cycle. You are unaware of it happening. However, several schools of therapy have chosen to identify and utilize this cycle, such as cognitive-behavioral psychology. When you can recognize that this cycle exists, you can take advantage of it-you can begin to utilize your understanding of the cycle to follow it in reverse. Effectively, you will be looking at behaviors that people display and then tracing them back to the feelings behind them. This is why body language is so important to understand. When you can understand what is going on with someone’s behavior, you can understand their feelings. When you understand their feelings, you can begin to find out the underlying thoughts that they have. This is about the closest thing to mind reading that you can ever truly attain. To analyze other people, you have a simple process to get through-you must first find out the neutral baseline of behavior. This is the default behavior of the person. You must then begin to look for deviations in that neutral behavior. From there, you try to put together clusters of behaviors to find out what is going on in the mid of someone else, and then you analyze. This process is not difficult, and if you can learn how to do so, while also learning how to interpret the various types of body language, you will find that understanding other people could never be easier. Establish a neutral baseline behavior set The most important aspect of being able to analyze someone else is through learning how to identify their baseline behavior. If you can do this, you can effectively allow yourself to identify how that person behaves in a neutral setting. Effectively, you will learn what that person’s quirks may be. For example, someone who happens to be reserved or particularly timid is likely to show several common signs of discomfort, even by default. They may cross their arms to shield their body, or stand defensively and refuse to make eye contact. However, the timid person is probably not lying if their behavior by default involves crossing arms and refusing to make eye contact. Because people’s baseline personality types and quirks vary so drastically from person to person, this becomes a critical first step, and you must make it a point to never skip it. Otherwise, you would assume that any shy person must be trying to deceive you. Getting that picture of baseline personality and nonverbal communication quirks are crucial. Identify deviations from neutral behaviors Once your baseline has been established, you can begin to identify any deviations from it. This means that you can find out which of the behaviors that you are seeing do not match up with what you have come to expect via your initial observations. This stage can occur during all sorts of interactions. You may ask a question and then observe to see what the response will be to determine whether that person is answering truthfully. You can probe and look for signs of discomfort. You can effectively test to see how convincing you are being when you are trying to persuade someone to do something. Identify clusters of deviations Of course, just identifying those individual deviations is not always enough. You must also make it a point to recognize clusters of the deviations to get the true picture. When you master the art of reading body language, you will see that much of human body language can be interpreted in different ways depending on the context. Often, you need to get that context from looking at other behaviors that are occurring in conjunction with the behaviors you are analyzing. For example, there are several behaviors in deception that could have several meanings. Still, as soon as they occur together, you can usually infer that there is some level of deception occurring, which means that you need to proceed with caution. Analyze Finally, as you identify those clusters of deviations from the original, neutral behavioral baseline, you can start to find out what they mean. You can start to trace it back to find out whether or not the person is honest or how they are feeling. When you begin to analyze, that is when you truly get the real snapshot of the thoughts inside the person’s mind. You will be able to piece together whether the person has a problem in certain settings based upon seeing general repeated responses. You will be able to tell what is intimidating to them, or what seems to consistently motivate them to keep working toward their goals. In going through this stage, you can start to find out exactly what is needed to influence or manipulate them, if you should choose to do so. 36/54 Chapter 15 Micro-Expressions and Body Language Signs Micro expressions M icro expressions are tiny little features within our face that give us a better indication of what somebody else might be thinking or wanting to do. Whether it's a small wrinkle in their forehead or the way that they move their mouth, we can start to pick up on these tiny micro expressions to better understand what somebody is really thinking inside their head. There are seven different emotions that we can pick up through micro expressions. These include anger, fear, disgust, sadness, content, happiness, and surprise. These micro expressions will show people in different ways. However, there are specific indications that we can use, which will help us better understand what somebody might be feeling. Let's first discuss anger. Anger is something that we can pick up on by the way that a person uses their eyebrows and their mouth. If eyebrows are pointed down and inwards towards the nose, then this is a sign of anger. The lower lid might also become raised up and closing over their eyes, in a way that makes their lives look a little bit more squinted. They'll often keep their lips sucked in and tight around their mouths. They might have a frown in the way that their cheeks are tense and their mouths are pointing downwards. Let's move on then to discuss something that we do when something might smell bad, or if we simply don't like the information that somebody is telling us. We can show disgust in the same kind of way that we do anger in terms of eyebrow usage. Disgust will often leave the person with their mouth hanging open a little bit more. They'll have tense cheeks and a wrinkled nose. Their face is basically recoiling away from the disgusting thing that they're hearing. Fear is going to have similar eyebrow movements as well. However, they'll be raised extremely high and flat. If somebody's forehead is wrinkled, and their mouth is slightly open, then this can also tell us that they are feeling fear. Look at the rest of their body to indicate if it's fear, or if it's just surprise. Surprise looks a lot like fear but a little bit more positively. When somebody is surprised, they'll have curved eyebrows versus flat eyebrows as when they're fearful. They'll have their mouth open, but they might have the corners of their mouth turned up a little bit as well. Even when we receive bad news, we can still sometimes have a smile. The smile might manifest simply because we're trying to work through that emotion in our brain. Sadness is like anger turned downwards. You'll have those arched eyebrows; except they'll be hanging a little bit looser and closer to your eyes. A more relaxed cheek is seen in sadness, but the corners of their mouth will also be turned down. Content is sort of like complacency. You're satisfied with the moment, but you're not necessarily happy. You feel comfortable, and you're not really angry or anything like that. Content is when we keep our mouths flat. You might have one side or the other raised. Not in a smile just sort of half expression. This is because we don't have that much emotion at the moment, but we're trying to show the other person what that emotion might be in our face. And finally, let's discuss happiness. This is undoubtedly one of the easiest micro expressions we can pick up on. Somebody who's smiling is going to be a happy person. The bigger the smile, the easier it is to understand how they might be feeling. Let's take a more in-depth look into what smiling can tell us about another person. Fundamentals of body language Body language is a main form of communication and you can get so much more from paying attention to body language than you can with any other form of communication. A person’s body doesn’t lie. If they are perturbed, their body will show it. If they’re angry, the body will show it. The body will show what a person does and doesn’t want to do, if they are tired, interested, bored, etc. Body language is part of our everyday transactions and interactions. You probably already observe and analyze so much more body language than you think. If you are walking and you see a certain swing in the hips in another person, this can be enough to give you a whole idea about what that person wants. A small change in eye direction can be a huge mark of body language. These are very subtle movements that result in the transmission of ideas and attitudes. If you have any experience with acting, you know that how a person leads with their body can tell you about their personality. If a person “leads” with one part of their body, you might notice it in how they walk; one person might lead with their head, and you will notice that will be the most prominent part of the body as they transport themselves. Another person might lead with the hips. People tend to accentuate one part of their body when walking, and this can tell you a little something about their personality. For example, if a person is leading with their hips, you might find that they are a particularly sexual person and that sexual and sensual drives are how they make their way in the world and how they use their bodies and minds in space. If a person leads with their head, you might find that they are more cerebral and like to use their cognitive skills to attack a problem. If a person leads with their feet, they might be telling you that they are a little cautious and aren’t going to jump into anything quickly, not exposing themselves until they find that the coast is clear. These are all examples of the ways that body language can be analyzed. Remember, body language is an art. In purveying it and reading it, you must remember to use artfulness and artful considerations when encountering this. There are no formulas, there is only intuition. You must develop the side of you that can intuitively read people and trust that part of you through the process. There are some archetypes that you can look for in deciphering body language. These are archetypes that people play into in their personalities. Sometimes, they are accurate, while sometimes, there is more to the story. First, there is the “cop” archetype. The “cop” archetype may be found in parents, authoritarian figures, and other people who intimidate us. The cop’s posture is big and tall, with the chest puffed out and the head relatively straight. A cop’s abdomen must always be strengthened, almost flexed, and the arms must be ready to grab for tools around the waist. This is a certain posture that shows the attitude of alertness, aggression, and strength. This archetype can be called upon to remember the body language characteristics of a person who fits these archetypes. The facial expression will be stern and serious. The head may reach in but is always cautious. The following archetype for body language is the nerd. The “nerd” is submissive in nature, except in places where they feel very comfortable, and the nerd is always trying to protect him or herself. The nerd has broken down shoulders that do not convey strength. Eye contact is scarce with this type. The nerd will always find ways to not engage, to be avoidant, to look away, or to move their body to other places to avoid contact with most people in the world. The nerd is not experienced with interaction. However, when the nerd is in his or her element, they will size up and appear bigger and stronger. They may inhibit a different personality type when they are with people they trust or when they are partaking in an activity that they enjoy. This is part of reading body language, and it knows when a 37/54 person is in their element or not in their element. Another archetype to consider is the “seductress”. The seductress has the attitude that she has what everyone wants. She or he might be coy in their words but very suggestive in their body language. They might decide to wear clothes that accentuate their physical figure, and they might like to tease and play with the body, showing certain parts to certain people. The seductress will know exactly when to reveal themselves to the people around them and when to keep quiet. They are very good at getting what they want, and they leverage their power as an attractive person into getting what they want. The body language characteristics involved in this person will involve a lot of touching and a lot of physical proximity. The seductress will know how to impart a physical sense of closeness to the people that they want to be with, and they will simulate a relationship with almost everyone that they want to. They are usually good at manipulating people, especially those who are lonely or afraid. They will often lead with the hips or breasts, and they will be very visible in a room. These are the type of people who like to make an entrance. You will know when they enter a room. Another body language archetype is the “old lady”. This is the traditional archetype of an old lady, who has completed her life tasks and is very satisfied with her. This is a person who understands her grace and elegance and has a lot of experiences. However, she is not concerned with getting what she wants, as she has mostly already gotten what she wants out of life. Rather, the “old lady” is satisfied and looks more to social interaction. She will be very strong on eye contact and smiley and will have bright facial expressions that are delighted to encounter another person. She will lead gracefully with the hips, but not forcefully so. Something to look out in the body language of this archetype is their facial expression, as older people will often experience a flattening to their effect. Another archetype of body language is the “humble worker”. A humble worker is someone who knows their place in the line-up of hierarchy, and they know how to show non-verbal respect to the people who are around them. These people might include people that they are working for or with. The humble worker rarely looks up from their work, but when they do, they will reveal their effect, which can clue you into their internal state. Humble workers effect may be congruent with their state, and perhaps, they are a type of worker who does not delight in interaction. In this case, a humble worker will not make eye contact, but rather will be more focused on the labor duties that they have to conduct. However, many with this body language type will be good at looking up and smiling and enjoying the company of others. The posture of this person may be crouched, as they devote most of their time to diligently working. They may lead with the hands, as working with the hands is a common preoccupation for these types. 38/54 Chapter 16 Dark Seduction Is it love or manipulation? T here is a lot of information about relationships and love today. Social media, websites, counselors, and every other person who feel they know about love are willing to offer advice. Majority of us will listen to any advice about love. This is because love brings hope, and the world needs more of it. We hope that someone out there loves us, be it a parent, a close friend, or a partner. We look for ways to find lasting love and making it stay. The thought of an empowering and sustainable love brings us hope. The thought of true love is enchanting and easy, but so many of us fall for the wrong people. A large number of people have fallen in love and not received the same. It was the hope for a better tomorrow that keeps people in the wrong manipulative relationships. How can you tell the difference between true love and manipulation? 1. Healthy love offers freedom, while manipulation involves control. Manipulative relationships cut out freedom. The partners become socially isolated and will do very little to explore their passions outside the relationship. Unhealthy relationships have very few friends and will limit their activities because of manipulation. Normally, the manipulative partner crushes the freedom of the other. Once a relationship becomes isolated to this extent, the two people become co-dependent and toxic to each other. 2. True love disagrees but manipulation fights As the saying goes, all couples fight. When a couple has healthy love, they are able to move on even after disagreements. When a relationship is healthy, differences in opinions are not taken as the sign of the end; neither are the sources of blame. Different people have different opinions and being in a relationship does not mean that you agree on everything. Healthy love will encourage this and even take it as an opportunity to grow. Healthy people allow others to have differing opinions. However, manipulative relationships stand for my way or the highway. The partners do not agree to disagree; rather, they take every fight personally and destroy the relationship. Every difference in opinion is seen as an offense and a belittlement to the relationship. In unhealthy relationships, the disagreements escalate into horrible silent treatments and full-blown arguments until one of the partners (normally the passive one) succumbs and apologizes for the conflict or changes the plan altogether to fit the needs of the manipulator. 3. Healthy love will compliment while manipulation will insult True love is very empowering. Each partner looks for the good in the other, becomes proud of it, and acknowledges it emotionally and verbally. Healthy love is supportive, communicative, and nurturing. The partners encourage each other to live their dreams. They pull each other up when there is some sort of failure. Healthy love wants the best and highest life experiences for everyone. In manipulative relationships, the partners (especially the manipulative one) do not seem to enjoy the success and independence of the other. In fact, they somehow relish the moments of failure of their partners and will often tell the other "I told you so" when things go wrong. A manipulative partner will fear the independence of the spouse. Therefore, he/she will withhold emotional support. Behind these relationships is a lot of emotional violence. The intention of the manipulator is to keep their partner down so that he/she does not become strong enough to leave and be happier. 4. Healthy love is based on relationship while manipulation is based on agenda In most cases, it is hard to differentiate between manipulation and love. That is why many of us stay in manipulative relationships thinking that it is love. Manipulation is agenda oriented, while true love is healthy and is rooted in relationship. In a healthy relationship, partners are not all about having power and control over each other - There are openness and flexibility. No one needs to force the other into anything because the level of trust allows everyone to choose, be real and also vulnerable. On the other hand, manipulative relationships are about power. Unhealthy love does not leave room for vulnerability because it is an opportunity for hurting one another. This love is bent to one side - the agenda of one person is more important than the other. In these relationships, the concept of love is measured by how much one person is willing to give to the other. Manipulative partners are not in a relationship to love; rather, they want to be loved. They convince the victim to do things for them then claim it represents love. 5. Genuine love finds humor while manipulation involves nit-picking Healthy love understands that everyone is human and therefore leaves room for error. There is always going to be something about a partner that you will find annoying. However, in a healthy relationship, such idiosyncrasies, be they little or big, can come to be seen as endearing, adorable or at least tolerable. People in healthy relationships focus on the bigger picture, and everyone feels grateful for being accepted as they are. On the other hand, manipulators will find fault in every situation. A small mishap can anger the manipulative partner so much. For instance, if one person is ten minutes late, it can ruin the entire day for the other. Such relationships focus on very rigid rules about matters cleanliness, chores, eating habits, time frames, and other nitty-gritty things. These minute things determine the respect and importance of the relationship. Sadly, focusing on such small matters too intensely is not healthy. That rigidity will keep the relationship in total distress over nothing. 6. Healthy love is full of honesty wile manipulative relationships are hypocritical. When people are in a healthy relationship, they possess the integrity to stay honest with each other. They will tell each other the truth even though it hurts. Healthy love involves empathy; thus, active listening occurs - defenses are brought down, leaving room for truth and understanding. Feedback is given and received with a level of understanding and respect. Healthy love will inspire the spouses to become better for each other and maintain the relationship. On the other hand, a manipulative relationship involves one person placing rigid rules upon the other. Interestingly, 39/54 the manipulative partner does not live by the same rules he/she sets. When the manipulator is confronted, he/she becomes defensive and deflects all the problems to the partner. 7. Healthy love involves being positive, while manipulation is negative. Healthy love is easy, fun, open, joyous, active, relaxed, and quiet. Basically, every partner knows that he/she has a role in the relationship and therefore, watches his/her actions, feelings, and feedbacks. The type of attitude, emotion, and effort brought on the table determines the direction of the relationship. Thus, the partners look for positive vibes. In a healthy relationship, partners choose to pay attention to the strengths of each other rather than the weaknesses. If a person chooses to focus on the good qualities in a partner, it becomes easier to love. However, focusing on the negative gives one hard time. Manipulative relationships are the exact opposite of healthy love, whereby the partners focus on what they cannot stand about each other. Every time an infraction occurs, it starts a nuclear war in the relationship. There is no room for human error, and every mistake becomes a bashing session. Manipulation in relationships creates tremendous amounts of division and hurt where the connection is mightily based on hate rather than love. Healthy love and relationships are open fun and strong; thus, the partners want to spend more time together. Unhealthy love is so consumed with no-win games, broken rules, and conflicts that the couples do not want to spend time together. We understand love and manipulation more clearly once we have experienced each. It is possible to have healthy love. This kind of love is only shared between people who are willing to consciously put love and grace in every aspect of their relationship. People who want healthy relationships are very careful when choosing who to love, and they take their time before starting a relationship. They pace their love from the beginning leaving it room to grow. Unhealthy relationships involve manipulation. The pace in the relationship is fast, and the manipulative partner seeks to establish a firm ground before the other understands what is happening. Genuine people who want the relationship to last for long will choose to stay respectful, conscious, and positive about the relationship. They will not rush you to make decisions. The above-mentioned differences can guide you to spot and avoid a manipulator. How can you stop a manipulator? The first step to stopping a manipulator is spotting them. A manipulator intentionally creates an imbalance in the life of the victim and uses that to exploit him/her. Manipulators use their victims to serve their own selfish agendas. Most manipulative people have four common tactics. First, they look for your weakness and use it against you Secondly, once found, they take a defensive stand and use your weakness to get to you. Thirdly, they use their shrewd machinations to convince the victim to give up something in order to serve some self- centered interests, Finally, in social, work, and family situations, once a manipulator manages to take advantage of you, there are high chances of him/her repeating the violation until the victim puts a stop to the exploitation. 40/54 Chapter 17 Undetected Mind Control T here is a fascination in dark psychology that has to do with hiding in the shadows while misleading victims. Like with covert emotional manipulation, the goal here is to influence behavior without being obvious about it. Mind control is a general term that can be used to describe many different techniques for invading a target's mind and then triggering certain behaviors. If a dark persuader could use some electronic device implanted in their victims and control them at will, then the world would likely fall into chaos. Because one, there are more manipulative people out there that many realize. And two, if such victims could be controlled like the fictional sleeper agent, then It would be very difficult to blame the controller for any crimes committed. Mind control presupposes that people have free will in the first place. Each of us has our own goals, behaviors, and motivations behind what we do. If we did not, then our actions would only be dictated by random chance. And nobody believes that they are a pair of dice. At the base level, our motivation stems from the animal drives. These are things like hunger, sleep, and need of shelter. If nothing else, our behaviors would be governed by these things because we are self-preserving lifeforms. The dark persuader, then, want to target those areas that make us higher creatures than animals. Animals can easily be manipulated-or rather trained-to adopt certain behaviors. If their animal drives do not line up with our desires, we can domesticate animals to come on board. Pets such as dogs and cats can be conditioned to do some behaviors and avoid others through an application of reward and punishment. Housebreaking a pet is easy, but it is unclear if metaphorically housebreaking a human is possible. Since humans have other drives besides their animistic ones, trying to influence behavior solely through those drives may not be as effective. Additionally, animals don’t really possess the ability to think critically. Humans are the “most dangerous game” and will resist any type of aggression with their own unique flight or fight response. Humans are clever enough to detect when someone is trying to mess with them. The dark persuader has to move in shadows undetected by this ability to critically think. Rover may make happy to be conditioned by their master, a human not so much. The Power of Suggestion In recent years the term “power of suggestion” has made the rounds in self-help circles and other nonsensical avenues to describe a supernatural power that can make things magically appear. Suggestion is merely what it sounds like: someone or something implanting a suggestion in your mind that you then use to make some connection, nothing more. Indirect control can be produced when the target comes to a conclusion from their own volition, or when they perform a certain task that the attacker was merely hinting at, but never directly making a command. Such instances are possible through the power of suggestive language, innuendo, and fallacious arguments. State-sponsored propaganda makes use of all of these things. Just as common is the propaganda dished out in the media, by multinational corporations, and by political parties. The stuff is practically everywhere that you look. Since society has been built in hierarchical structures, this shouldn’t be too much of a surprise. A posture that comes from power and control lends itself to the deployment of manipulative tactics. Propaganda works because a person may adopt the same ideology, dogma, or social norms that the propaganda is hinting at. This is amplified by the larger societal structure that they live in, as well as the historical context. Propaganda doesn’t need to make sense. It only has to be convincing. Appeals to emotion are commonly used, as are other fallacy-based appeals. Once a common language has been adopted, either through mass media or propaganda, it tends to stick around. Communication is, therefore modulated by that same language. Everyone talks in more or less the same way in certain contexts, because to do so otherwise would be to ostracize from society. An example of this is the sexual innuendo. Everyone learns from a young age what the “dirty words” are. And if through sex-ed they learn the more explicit details, a young person can put two and two together. Most likely, though, it will be a combination of mass media communications, social circle, and exposure to sex that will shape the understanding of sexual innuendo. As adults, many of us visit beloved children movies and tv shows only to balk at the rather obvious adult jokes hidden behind cute characters. We ask ourselves, “how did I not notice that joke as a kid?” and wonder how the producers got away with it. Over time we are conditioned to understand sexual innuendo because sex is a pivotal part of the human experience. It is also vastly prevalent in media and advertising. The power of suggestion is quick, automatic, and endogenous to individual thinking it up. With sexual innuendo, we don’t say somebody else put the dirty image in our head. We put it there ourselves through a combination of sex conditioning and understanding of a common language of sex. Instead, we say that somebody has a dirty mind if they made the connection before us (regardless whether that connection already existed) Notice though, that sexual innuendo is definitely provoked by other people. It has to be. While the connection happened in our heads, it was the other person who forced us to make that connection in the first place. There are two components to the trick. One is the preexisting knowledge of social and sexual conventions. That much is a given. The second component is exposure to the innuendo (an idea, image, or thing) that happened outside of the mind. The person who makes the innuendo is triggering a suggestion in your mind. And this indirectly is a form of undetected mind control, whether you realize it or not. The power of suggested in this form is limited to language and thoughts. Its true potential is unlocked if it can be successfully applied to behavior as well. Suggestive Behavior Any type of communication is also a type of human action, and any human action is a type of human behavior. The power of suggestion as it pertains to language and thought is only the first step to affecting behavior through it. After all, it is the ultimate goal of many types of propaganda. It is one thing to get your nation unified with the same cause; it is another entirely to get them to enlist for the war. Many times, language will naturally lend itself to action. Other times the idea has to be entertained for a while. Enough repetition of the language is necessary for it to stick. Sexual innuendo takes years to develop, during which sexual ideas can be encountered all the time (thanks, Hollywood!) This can be done on a grand scale, as it is being done by the media and for-profit organizations. But for them, the goal is to get you to buy, buy, buy. That catchy slogan for your favorite bran, restaurant, or product is acting on the power of suggestion. And while slogans and other types of advertising may or may not be intentionally using dark psychology, the net effect is the same-a type of mental suggestion to buy. Again, this goes completely undetected by the population at large. But nobody can really blame themselves. Who 41/54 among us can simply stop participating in the economy of products? Probably not many. Just as animals have base needs, so do humans. Only like with our drives, our needs go above and beyond the needs of animals. That means companies can sell us more things and use the power of suggestion to help us find the products we need. Weaponizing the power of suggestion isn’t always straightforward. It requires a pervasive presence of the common language that must always be fresh in the mind of the victim. At the same time, the attacker cannot be overly obvious, or their attempts to manipulate the other will no longer be covert. A not so far-fetched scenario may be a situation where a problematic young man meets a teenager who goes to catholic school. Supposing that the girl has lived a pious life (relatively speaking) and that she has controlling parents and a stalwart belief in her faith, the young man is tasked with trying to sleep with her (as young men tend to do). If we grant that they are already in a relationship, the young man must find out a way to use the power of suggestion to subvert everything that the young woman has believed to that point. First, a common language must be established. In this case, one of freedom, free-spirit and most likely, of rebellion. From there, the young man has to allude to, repeat and surround his partner with such language until connections are made in the target's mind. This could be along the lines of the following: 1. “There are way too many rules. It is like we are in prison without being in prison.” 2. “Wouldn’t it be cool if we could do anything we wanted, just you and me?” 3. “I’m getting bored of making out.” 4. “I hate how parents always think they know what's right.” 5. “If only we were older.” 42/54 Chapter 18 The Internet and Dark Psychology I t is an established fact that psychology is the scientific study that encompasses the study of human thoughts behavior emotions mind and so on. The beautiful thing is when one gets a deeper understanding of how psychology operates; it can be of great benefit not only to oneself but also in our everyday interactions with others. Man is a social being, therefore must process social behaviors which psychology seeks to understand, most time explains and sometimes predict. Despite having many branches, a large part of psychology is aimed at the diagnosis and treatment of mentally derailed individuals who possess a threat to the general public but depending on the perspective, Psychologists are versatile and cuts across many other areas. Also, note that psychology is all around you, your everyday activity, your interaction with others, that TV commercial you saw recently, the print ads, the website you are most frequent on and so on. All of these and more are either trying to persuade or convince you to bulge to whatever they are trying to offer. Interestingly, there is psychology for any human problem no matter the age or gender which is why psychologist is bent on making life better and improving human behavior. As constructive, educative and informative as psychology maybe, there is a dark side to it. This aspect focuses on human consciousness as it relates to the nature of people prey on or victimizing others. Dark psychology aims to understand the various thoughts, reasoning, perception or feelings that often lead to human predatory behavior because it entails the inhumane and brutal victimization of others without any reasonable human comprehension. Predators commit theft, abuse, and violence upon their victims, and they appear in any form of personality. They are most times less compassionate and suspicious looking. Trolls generally can be annoying and irritating and can also be an agent of destruction/destruction. An internet troll starts quarrel and offends people on the internet. According to psychology, such people sometimes might have dark personality traits to them. They live such a life that is based on their sadistic nature and others must suffer the same fate and they naturally make you feel bad. Most times, there is a psychological disorder that is triggered by past experience or an ongoing occurrence, the best thing to do when you encounter one is to completely ignore them as they feed on your suffering which gives them great pleasure. These internet trolls can be called a predator according to Michael Nuccitelli of predator.co. These people are first- class cyberbullies, stalkers, criminals, sexual predators, and the likes. These set of people use the power of the internet to gather useful information about their victims or targets. A predator can be a group of people or persons that one way or the other, directly or indirectly enjoy stalking, exploring and victimizing unsuspecting individuals by using the power of information communication technology (ICT). They are most times consumed with their desire for power, imaginable fantasies or just suffering from loneliness and searching for acceptance. Age or gender is not a barrier as a predator can be of any age, gender or economic status. Initially, all we had was the human predator but with the rise of the technology age, things are now even more complicated as predators harness the power of ICT and use it to their advantage create profiles and stay almost untraceable. Dark Traits and Online Activities The internet is a world on its own, it is a chain of network communicating with other billion networks out there as long as you are connected and the other party also, no matter where you are, you would definitely be connected. With the internet a whole lot can be done, you have access to almost anything you can think of. Information is just a click away once you stay connected and it has also made communication way easier. Despite having wonderful advantages, the disadvantages are life-threatening. One of the common disadvantages is that people work online 24/7 and spend a lot of time sitting while working in front of a computer often get ill. They get weaker, develop eye issues, back pain, and the likes. Some people get addicted, some fall into depression and isolation and others, serious health issues while many ends up with serious social issues or psychological disorder. The internet often encourages the use of different behaviors and activities that have done offline to be practicalized online. Imagine someone addicted to sex, games or shopping, when such a person gets online, it becomes unlimited which far along turns to a habit. If as a normal being, the internet has such an effect, imagine what it would pose in the hands of a predator. The Narcissism is proud and lacks empathy, the Machiavellianism is manipulative and lacks moral while the psychopathy is selfish and remorseless. Above all traits according to research has some things in common such as the lack of empathy. Categorically, dark personality triad is a big influence in the behaviors of predators that trolls online. The online behavior of a Psychopathy can be a remorseless behavior while a Machiavellianism manipulates, and Narcissism preoccupied with getting attention because of their self-behavior. All of these traits, one can easily use it to pinpoint an internet troll that possesses a dark personality. From several researchers, it was discovered that the personality triad behaviors are mostly found on social media platforms like Facebook and most trolls have a psychopathic tendency, unlike the Narcissist who promotes themselves or social status by the same social media platform. The online activity of a Narcissist since he has pride would be a display of superiority by uploading images that shouts expensive, they can be materialistic and display a sense of superiority; they can be domineering and a thirst for power and Status. Machiavellianism on the other hand even though can have self-interest but theirs is to manipulate and deceive unknowing victims to achieve their own goals. The Psychopath in their own way is destructive of all the 3 personalities. The Psychopath has no conscience, is violent in nature and very aggressive. The psychopathy is attracted to people that catch their attention either by social life or social status and so on. Hypothetically speaking, Psychopathic is most likely associated which trolling and are more attracted to popular people on Facebook. Narcissism, on the other hand, might not be a troll but see themselves as being superior to everyone. They look down on people and they believe that they are special. Above all, Psychopathic traits can be sadistic and may find pleasure in harming others for fun’s sake because they derive pleasure from it. So it is acceptable to say that abnormal online behavior is mostly Psychopathic traits. How the Internet Promotes Different Vices And Negative Traits? The majority don't know that the internet is like an onion bulb consisting of different layers; we have the surface which is the aspect accessible to everyone, like your Google or Yahoo where we can buy things online or access our social media handles and the likes. Surprisingly, this surface web does not even make up for 10% of the internet we use, the remaining 90% is the real deal. They are what we call Deep Web and Darknet respectively. The deep web is only accessible to authorized persons as this is where private data such as legal documentation belonging to the government are stored. Also, medicals and academic information and not left out. The Deep Web is overseen by authorized and special services. 43/54 Moving deeper is the Darknet which is the most dangerous of them all, it uses the Onion Router (TOR). To have access, one would have to download the app. With just a click, one can end up in dangerous sites like the uncensored hidden wiki and many more. A site such as these provides information on drugs, weapons, pornography and so on. Various transactions can take place on the Darknet using our everyday services such as FedEx. An important thing to note is that users of the Darknet can be anonymous, every personal data can be concealed, secure and untraceable. In regard to psychology, Psychologists have come to an understanding that there is a big relationship between the Dark personality traits which is the dark side of the human mind and the dark side of the internet. Some researchers even claimed that the amount of time spent online can increase or lead people to develop dark traits. The question now is "is it the various online activities that attract individuals who already exhibit a good percentage of dark personality traits? Or can we say it is a long period spent on the internet that has increased these traits in individuals? There is a probability that both assumptions might be correct either way, the internet has over time become a sort for humans to explore their dark side. The internet has bred addicts because some negative traits seem to have been nurtured and encouraged by the internet which now possesses negative consequences when offline. The internet negative effect on personality is a functional part of online Psychology. With the help of the internet-related digital lifestyle, its effect on gambling or shopping is clear evidence of impulse control disorder. Another negative trait is the rise of suicidal persons; it is no news that the suicide rate has risen over the years. One cannot commit suicide online, but the increase of suicide definitely can be linked to an internet effect. The internet has also promoted online shaming, cyberbullying, name-calling and so on which is regarded as a violent online discourse which can lead to a less cohesive offline society. What about violent online games? Research has shown that offline aggressive traits can trigger exposure to violent games online. The internet generally has psychological effects that once portrayed online, can remain relevant and be manifested offline even after one has logged off and these technologies are advancing as the day goes by. I asked how the internet has promoted or influenced the lives of people, the response definitely would differ as we have individual differences. The way of life nowadays can't be compared to the way people lived 20 years ago. These days we have fewer physical encounters and more of online interactions which in return creates a huge gap in humanity. Let us consider some disadvantages of the internet using social media as a case study; ● Reduction in emotional connection. In the days of old, if offended or you are the offender, you can easily talk it out with the other party, cry if you want to or perhaps punch some sense into one another and seal it off with a hug, case settled. in today's world with the rise of the internet or technology generally, if such should occur, one could send an 'I'm sorry' text and you wouldn't even know if the person is sorry or not. Using social media as a means of communication has killed our emotional connection one way or another. This is what some dark traits feed on you would never know what the other person is up to, all you see is an exchange of words until it gets too late. ● Avenue to hurt others. Remember the internet troll? They are the expert in this. They find pleasure in hurting others through hurtful words. It's a free world on the internet, you can say anything and get away with it. They forget that at the other end is a real person who has feelings and emotions, but they can crush all that in just a line or two sentences. That is why some people end up timid or even commit suicide in extreme cases because of cyberbullying. ● Face-to-face interaction has gone. The way Mr. A would respond to you or communicate with you face-to-face can't be compared to how Mr will do the same if he is dependent on the keyboard. People now prefer to talk over a chart other than the old-fashioned meetup. No wonder a whole lot of Psychopaths are on the loose. ● Dead expression. You can be as angry as an erupting volcano but still, type LOL as a reply to a message. In the actual life, you are boiling with anger but laughing out loud via chat, who are we fooling? Laughter is an expression of a pleasant emotion and cannot be done otherwise but the internet has made it so. ● Lack of understanding. Because everyone is busy online, people tend not to understand other’s feelings or emotions. Someone might be crying out for help but no one will be listening to why lack of understanding or perhaps thoughtfulness. ● Awkward interactions. Gaps have been created in so many relationships these days, friends and family now live as strangers; you are hanging out with friends or family and a single decent conversation could not be made because everyone is busy with his or her phone - someone is gaming online, another keeping up with the latest blog post or fashion trend or Sports update to mention but a few. There is a disconnection thus affecting relationships and creating this awkward feeling even when it's your loved ones. ● False self-image. This is the driving force of Narcissism; the average human lives a fake life on social media. We all tend to amplify our personalities to look cool and acceptable, your post must be perfect and flawless. You live in a world of imagination which you play online for others to see and admire. Sometimes, these displays cause others to feel bad about themselves only if they knew. Nobody wants to stay true to who they are and their identity, they cannot be blamed the Internet caused it. ● No family Bond. It's a family movie night, a time for the family to bond but Facebook, Twitter, texting or Instagram and the whole lot would not permit that to happen. We pretend to be watching the movie but in fact, we are not. ● Lack of attention. Findings have it that some accidents these days are caused by phone users, either the ones behind the steering or the ones walking by the roadside, why? Distractions here and there. The Internet can make one popular over time especially when you have a whole lot of friends and followers on social media platforms, you need to keep up with the trend, so you spend most of your time online. This way you wouldn't take cognizance of things going on around you. Everything would suffer because of your lack of attention; your schoolwork, your businesses, friends and even families. It is important to know that some people cannot imagine their lives without the internet and if you are among such people, then you might as well be a victim of the negative impact of the internet. ● Depression and anxiety because it promotes poor mental health which is a result of spending long hours online. ● Anxiety, the fear of missing out which is also a result of your frequent online activities; so you get anxious when you are not online because you feel a whole lot is happening and you are not a part of it. ● Body shame for someone who has no self-esteem such that would be thrown off balance by social media. If you don't value or love your shape, size, height or complexion, when you come on the internet you will encounter people who are better than you, the celebrities, wealthy people and the likes. These might have a negative effect on your body Image, never believe all you see some might just be a narcissist. ● Insomnia, it is no news that spending too much time online can create an unhealthy sleep pattern. It can make 44/54 one lose quality sleep which in returns, effects general productivity. Conclusively, the internet is more addictive than alcohol and the likes. Can you boast of a day you went without the internet or checking up on your social media handles? If Facebook decides to go off the radar today, would you be emotionally okay to bear it? We all are addicted one way or the other, but the degree varies and it's on this note that the emergence of dark personality traits came to be. Harmful avenues of Dark Personality Apart from the internet having disadvantages, it has also provided an avenue for people to lay their hands-on harmful information about dark psychology thereby using it intentionally against one another. They should be searching for information as to identifying a manipulator or how not to fall victim instead people are after ways of hurting others or getting back at someone. They want to learn the art of dark personality traits and how they operate. Some of this harmful information is aimed at seeking to get an edge or more power in their everyday life. 45/54 Chapter 19 The Real Vampires T he most important step in recognizing the presence of a social or emotional predator is maintaining an awareness of the basic psychology of all emotional predators-whether they exhibit symptoms of psychopathy, Machiavellianism, or narcissism. Even if someone’s behavior is not disruptive enough to be considered a sign of serious mental illness, anyone whose relationships depend upon their ability to emotionally manipulate others should be considered as potentially dangerous to your personal or professional safety and well-being. This is because it is neither possible nor advisable to conduct a full-scale psychological analysis of everyone with whom you come into contact and because social and emotional predators’ main skill set involves defeating efforts at detection. All emotional predators share some common traits. As a result of some type of congenital psychological impairment at birth, as a result of some type of very serious emotionally or psychologically traumatic experience or series of experiences at a very young age, or as a result of some combination of these factors, emotional predators uniformly lack the ability to develop genuine emotional attachments with other people, to develop any deep, genuine feelings of warmth, to appreciate or value the feelings, thoughts, or rights of other people, or to develop any sense of respect for the principles and laws that govern society. Furthermore, because these predatory individuals have learned from a very young age to live, survive, and even achieve high levels of success despite these serious psychological problems, they are unable to regard their condition as abnormal. They may regard their compromised psychological state as equal to or superior to a normal, healthy psychological state. The second primary component common to all forms of predatory psychology follows from the first. Predators are unable to live like people who are not psychologically damaged. They are unable to form lasting, meaningful relationships, they are unable to find satisfaction in the daily routines and habits of life, and they are unable to see any value in the pursuit of traditional professional, personal, or academic goals. Predators must live in a world that is not designed to serve their needs. As a result, the only feelings they are ever likely to develop toward so-called “normal” people are feelings of rage, jealousy, and hatred because they cannot ever have or do or experience the normal joy, happiness, and fulfillment that psychologically healthy people may take for granted. Thus, when an emotional predator approaches you, there is a lot to consider. First, because predators have become very good at finding ways to live and hide their deficiencies, you may not realize that the person you are talking to is an emotional or social predator. Second, people with healthy psychology can quite easily communicate with each other the reason they have made contact through basic conversation. However, a social or emotional predator cannot ever actually feel any genuine emotions and never really has any value for the goals and objectives you may consider important. They are always performing because they are not capable of living any other way. So, when predator begins a conversation with you, it may seem normal on the surface, but the motivations will also be devious and treacherous, and likely the only reason they have started a conversation is to establish trust and begin mining you for information. Third, the goal of all predators is the same. You may likely regard your personal life and your professional career as your source of happiness and fulfillment, and your motivations may range from professional ambition to altruism and selflessness. But the predator can find happiness and fulfillment one way only-by destroying your happiness, your success, and even you. Because you have something the predator can never have, you are a constant reminder of his or her own damaged and compromised psychological makeup. Yet, predators, too, need to find some type of fulfillment and satisfaction, so they can relieve themselves of what would otherwise be an existence filled with unending boredom and pain. Through a process of tortured and impaired evolution, the predator has learned to mimic your pursuit of happiness and fulfillment. However, because your avenues to success are off limits to predators, they have established a new route-controlling you in an effort to inflict pain, abuse, and damage on you. Thus, whereas you may feel guilt when you hurt someone, the predator feels joy and glee and relief. Your path to success is professional, academic, and personal accomplishment. The predator’s path to success ids the destruction and abuse of others. Regardless of the specifics of how these character defects and psychological impairments manifest themselves, all emotional and social predators share the same basic psychological profile. Professional Relationships ● Be careful if you encounter someone who seems to use a lot of “props” or gimmicks when you initially meet them. For example, some people may have a habit of interposing their conversation with a so-called “winning smile.” If this behavior seems to follow a pattern of repetitiveness or becomes excessive, it may be a warning sign. ● Other props and gimmicks may include a tendency to make lots of promises, a habit of presenting you with gifts, or “fast talk” like a sales pitch. This type of communication is often used to conceal an underlying lack of genuineness, with the predator relying on superficiality and material objects to prove his or her claims of affection. ● “If it seems too good to be true, it probably is.” People use this as a reference to judge the relative honesty of business propositions every day. You can use the same frame of reference to detect whether you are dealing with an emotional predator. An emotional predator may often overcompensate for their inner emptiness and damaged psychology by creating an exterior image that is flawless to an unnatural degree. ● Emotional predators build self-esteem and value in their lives by destroying the self-esteem and value of the lives of others. One of their main tools is finding out what you like, what you value, and what you consider important so they can destroy it. Be cautious of people who seem to put in a lot of effort to win your confidence. They may do this in several ways: ○ Providing you with overwhelming support and encouragement. ○ Agreeing with all of your views and opinions. ○ Being very sweet, charming, and kind to a degree that you find out of the ordinary. ○ Offering you some type of intimate, personal secret to build trust. This is especially true if they pressure you to share something personal and intimate in return and react with anger if you refuse. ○ Sharing too much, too soon. ● All of us to some degree use some type of emotional influence in our relationships. There is nothing inherently wrong with relationships marked by a social dynamic; quite the opposite. However, if in your business dealings you encounter someone who displays the following tendencies to such a degree that they seem impossible to ignore, then use caution: ○ A sense of entitlement. ○ An attitude of superiority. 46/54 ○ A tendency to dominate conversations. ○ An inflated ego. ○ A tendency to express jealousy. ○ An ultra-competitive perspective. ○ Hyper-critical comments. ○ Statements that seem to indicate that the person believes himself or herself to be beyond the reach of rules or laws or can only be understood by people of the highest rank. ○ People who play the blame game. ○ Double-dealing. ● “Grooming behavior” is a term usually used to describe the methods used by sexual predators. However, psychologists have agreed that emotional predators of all kinds use similar methods when they are preparing their victim for an attack. Especially with new acquaintances, watch for the following behavior patterns: ○ A period of befriending and gaining the trust of the victim. ○ Befriending and gaining the trust of the victim’s associates. ○ Looking for opportunities to be alone with the victim. ○ Giving gifts or money to the victim. ○ Talking about inappropriate subject matter that may be intimate, overly personal, or involve illegal activity, and trying to make it sound normal or even fun, often in an effort to desensitize the victim to such language. ○ Attempts to make physical contact. ○ Personal comments about appearance or other forms of flattery. ○ Being unusually kind, generous, and helpful. ○ Assessing behavior, such as asking about your habits and routines. ○ Opening efforts to exert control and influence, such as secrecy, blame, and even threats. ○ Strategic efforts to create private encounters in which you are a captive audience. If you suspect that someone in your professional environment is engaging you in these predatory activities, ask yourself the following questions: ● Do you feel isolated from friends and family? ● Have your values changed? ● Do you feel guilty or afraid to express yourself? Personal Relationships While all of these behaviors may be present in the workplace, especially among people you don’t know personally and in an environment that rewards ultra-competitiveness and ruthlessness, your pursuit of personal relationships may also be plagued by an abundance of emotional predators. Although the psychology and motivation are the same, the tactics may be quite different. Some of the common technique’s predators will use in social situations are listed below: ● The need for control is a common element that can lead to the end of a relationship: ○ Excessive contact in an effort to establish your dependency on their approval. ○ Unhealthy or aggressive responses to rejection in an effort to impose limits and boundaries. ○ Endless debating and negotiating. ○ Physical aggression. ○ Poor treatment of other people. ○ Unexplained demonstrations of anger ● A demonstrable need to provoke: ○ Debasing comments. ○ Overuse of sarcasm. ○ Attempts to create feelings of jealousy. ○ The silent treatment ● Inconsistent behavior: ○ Projection and gaslighting. ○ Superficial charm. ○ Frequent disappearances and absences. ○ Attitude changes. ○ Intermittent reinforcement. Professional or Personal Relationships Not everyone’s life is perfectly organized or compartmentalized. Often environments and the people in them cross boundaries. Often in our daily lives, we wonder where things may have gone wrong. Quite often the answer may be that we are trapped in a relationship with an emotional predator. Regardless of the environment in which you meet people, you should always maintain a vigilant lookout for any of the following telltale signs of a predatory personality: ● People who are pathologically selfish. They may go through the motions of friendship and love, but their emptiness is apparent when they fail to initiate social outings or when all encounters leave you feeling exhausted and drained. ● Emotional predators may offer lots of charm and flattery, but if there is a lack of substance to your interactions with them, you can be sure the compliments are probably false, too. ● Predators will exaggerate their accomplishments, and even lie. If you call them on it, they will refuse to take responsibility or admit that they are wrong. ● A date or outing with an emotional predator may always be a high-stakes adventure. If you never seem able to engage with them simply over a cup of coffee and have a happy and fulfilling encounter, you may be dealing with a predator. ● Predators are bullies by nature and use anger as their primary means of communication. Avoid people who demonstrate a tendency to humiliate people or challenge anyone who seems to have more power or success than they do. Predators also use insults and putdowns to build themselves up. You may notice this kind of conduct directed at other people when you are out with a predator. For example, if you are at a café or restaurant a predator may try to impress you by insulting or humiliating the staff. ● Predators are manipulative, which they often show by making promises and then not keeping them. ● Because predators lack a conscience and do not understand that their abusive behavior should make them feel bad, a telltale sign may be anyone who boasts about committing abusive actions or crimes. 47/54 ● Predators may also display parasitic behavior. If you are involved with someone who is excessively lazy and uses you, you should find a way to end the relationship. 48/54 Chapter 20 Behavioral Traits of Favorite Victims of Manipulators T here are certain characteristics and behavioral traits that make people more vulnerable to manipulation, and people with dark psychology traits know this full well. They tend to seek out victims who have those specific behavioral traits because they are essentially easy targets. Let’s discuss 6 of the traits of the favorite victims of manipulators. Emotional insecurity and fragility Manipulators like to target victims who are emotionally insecure or emotionally fragile. Unfortunately for these victims, such traits are very easy to identify even in total strangers, so it’s easy for experienced manipulators to find them. People who are emotionally insecure tend to be very defensive when they are attacked or when they are under pressure, and that makes them easy to spot in social situations. Even after just a few interactions, a manipulator can gauge with a certain degree of accuracy, how insecure a person is. They’ll try to provoke their potential targets in a subtle way, and then wait to see how the targets react. If they are overly defensive, manipulators will take it as a sign of insecurity, and they will intensify their manipulative attacks. Manipulators can also tell if a target is emotionally insecure if he/she redirects accusations or negative comments. They will find a way to put you on the spot, and if you try to throw it back at them, or to make excuses instead of confronting the situation head-on, the manipulator could conclude that you are insecure and therefore an easy target. People who have social anxiety also tend to have emotional insecurity, and manipulators are aware of this fact. In social gatherings, they can easily spot individuals who have social anxiety, then target them for manipulation. "Pickup artists" are able to identify the girls who seem uneasy in social situations by the way they conduct themselves. Social anxiety is difficult to conceal, especially to manipulators who are experienced at preying on emotional vulnerability. Emotional fragility is different from emotional insecurity. Emotionally insecure people tend to show it all the time, while emotionally fragile people appear to be normal, but they break down emotionally at the slightest provocation. Manipulators like targeting emotionally fragile people because it’s very easy to elicit a reaction from them. Once a manipulator finds out that you are emotionally fragile, he is going to jump at the change to manipulate you because he knows it would be fairly easy. Emotional fragility can be temporary, so people with these traits are often targeted by opportunistic manipulators. A person may be emotionally stable most of the time, but he/she may experience emotional fragility when they are going through a breakup, when they are grieving, or when they are dealing with a situation that is emotionally draining. The more diabolical manipulators can earn your trust, bid their time, and wait for you to be emotionally fragile. Alternatively, they can use underhanded methods to induce emotional fragility in a person they are targeting. Sensitive people Highly sensitive people are those individuals who process information at a deeper level and are more aware of the subtleties in social dynamics. They have lots of positive attributes because they tend to be very considerate of others, and they watch their step to avoid causing people any harm, whether directly or indirectly. Such people tend to dislike any form of violence or cruelty, and they are easily upset by news reports about disastrous occurrences, or even depictions of gory scenes in movies. Sensitive people also tend to get emotionally exhausted from taking in other people’s feelings. When they walk into a room, they have the immediate ability to detect other people’s moods, because they are naturally skilled at identifying and interpreting other people’s body language cues, facial expressions, and tonal variations. Manipulators like to target sensitive people because they are easy to manipulate. If you are sensitive to certain things, manipulators can use them against you. They will feign certain emotions to draw sensitive people in so that they can exploit them. Sensitive people also tend to scare easily. They have a heightened "startle reflex," which means that they are more likely to show clear signs of fear or nervousness in potentially threatening situations. For example, sensitive people are more likely to jump up when someone sneaks up on them, even before they determine whether they are in any real danger. If you are a sensitive person, this trait can be very difficult to hide, and malicious people will be able to see it from a mile away. Sensitive people also tend to be withdrawn. They are mostly introverts, and they like to keep to themselves because social stimulation can be emotionally draining for them. Manipulators who are looking to control others are more likely to target people who are introverted because that trait makes it easy to isolate potential victims. Manipulators can also identify sensitive people by listening to how they talk. Sensitive people tend to be very proper; they never use vulgar language, and they tend to be very politically correct because they are trying to avoid offending anyone. They also tend to be polite, and they say please and thank you more often than others. Manipulators go after such people because they know that they are too polite to dismiss them right away; sensitive people will indulge anyone because they don't want to be rude, and that gives maliciously people a way in. Emphatic people Emphatic people are generally similar to highly sensitive people, except that they are more attuned to the feelings of others and the energy of the world around them. They tend to internalize other people's suffering to the point that it becomes their own. In fact, for some of them, it can be difficult to distinguish someone's discomfort from their own. Emphatic people make the best partners because they feel everything you feel. However, this makes them particularly easy to manipulate, which is why malicious people like to target them. Malicious people can feign certain emotions, and convey those emotions to emphatic people, who will feel them as though they were real. That opens them up for exploitation. Emphatic people are the favorite targets of psychopathic conmen because they feel so deeply for others. A conman can make up stories about financial difficulties and swindle lots of money from emphatic people. The problem with being emphatic is that because you have such strong emotions, you easily dismiss your own doubts about people because you would much rather offer help to a person who turns out to be a lair than deny help to a person who turns out to be telling the truth. Emphatic people have a big-hearts, and they tend to be extremely generous, often to their own detriment. They are highly charitable, and they feel guilty when others around them suffer, even if it’s not their fault and they can’t do anything about it. Malicious people have a very easy time taking such people on guilt trips. They are the kind of people who would willingly fork over their life savings to help their friends get out of debt, even if it means they would be ruined financially. Malicious people like to get into relationships with emphatic people because they are easy to take advantage of. Emphatic people try to avoid getting into intimate relationships in the first place because they know that it’s easy for them to get engulfed in such relationships and to lose their identities in the process. However, manipulators will doggedly pursue them because they know that once they get it, they can guilt the emphatic person into doing anything they want. 49/54 Fear of loneliness Many people are afraid of being alone, but this fear is more heightened in a small percentage of the population. This kind of fear can be truly paralyzing for those who experience it, and it can open them up to exploitation by malicious people. For example, there are many people who stay in dysfunctional relationships because they are afraid, they will never find someone else to love them if they break up with an abusive partner. Manipulators can identify this fear in a victim, and they'll often do everything they can to fuel it further to make sure that the person is crippled by it. People who are afraid of being alone can tolerate or even rationalize any kind of abuse. The fear of being alone can be easy to spot in a potential victim. People with this kind of fear tend to exude some level of desperation at the beginning of relationships, and they can sometimes come across as clingy. While ordinary people may think of being clingy as a red flag, manipulative people will see it as an opportunity to exploit somebody. If you are attached to them, they’ll use manipulative techniques to make you even more dependent on them. They can withhold love and affection (e.g., by using the silent treatment) to make the victim fear that he/she is about to get dumped so that they act out of desperation and cede more control to the manipulator. The fear of being alone is, for the most part, a social construct, and it disproportionately affects women more than men. For generations, our society has taught women that their goal in life is to get married and have children, so, even the more progressive women who reject this social construct are still plagued by social pressures to adhere to those old standards. That being said, the fact is that men also tend to be afraid of being alone. People with abandonment issues stemming from childhood tend to experience the fear of loneliness to a higher degree. There are also those people who may not necessarily fear loneliness in general, but they are afraid of being separated from the important people in their lives. For example, lots of people end up staying in abusive or dysfunctional relationships because they are afraid of being separated from their children. Fear of disappointing others We all feel a certain sense of obligation towards the people in our lives, but there are some people who are extremely afraid of disappointing others. This kind of fear is similar to the fear of embarrassment and the fear of rejection because it means that the person puts a lot of stock into how others perceive him or her. The fear of disappointing others can occur naturally, and it can actually be useful in some situations; parents who are afraid of disappointing their families will work harder to provide for them, and children who are afraid of disappointing their parents will study harder at school. In this case, the fear is actually constructive. However, it becomes unhealthy when it’s directed at the wrong people, or when it forces you to compromise your own comfort and happiness. When manipulators find out that you have a fear of disappointing others, they'll try to put you in a position where you feel like you owe them something. They’ll do certain favors for you, and then they’ll manipulate you into believing that you have a sense of obligation towards them. They will then guilt you into complying with any request whenever they want something from you. Personality Dependent disorders and emotional dependency Dependent personality disorder refers to a real disorder that is characterized by a person having an excessive and even pervasive need to be taken care of. This need often leads the person to be submissive towards the people in their lives and to be clingy and afraid of separation. People with this disorder act in ways that are meant to elicit caregiving. They tend to practice what's called "learned helplessness." This is where they act out of a conviction that they are unable to do certain things for themselves, and they need the help of others. Such people have a hard time making decisions, even when dealing with simple things like picking out which clothes to wear. They need constant reassurance and advice, and they let others take the lead in their own lives. These are the kinds of people who either move back into their parents' homes as adults or treat their spouses and partners as though they are their parents. Manipulators like to target people with dependent personality disorders because they are very easy to control and dominate. These people willingly cede control over their lives to others, so when manipulators come knocking, they don’t face much resistance. Manipulators start off by giving them a false sense of security, but once they have won their trust, they switch gears and start imposing their will on them. Emotional dependency is somewhat similar to dependent personality disorder, but it doesn't rise to the level of clinical significance. It stems from having low self-esteem, and it’s often a result of childhood abandonment issues. People with an emotional dependency will play the submissive role in relationships for fear of losing their partners. They tend to be very agreeable because they want to please the people in their lives. Such people are easy to manipulate, and malicious people can easily dominate them. 50/54 Chapter 21 Applying Manipulation and Mind Reprogramming in Different Roles A s you are aware of by now, your thoughts play a major role in your choices and decision-making in everyday life. In this segment, we look at these different roles and the way negative thinking can hold us back. Your thoughts influence your behaviors, which in turn, shape your life. So, learning to regulate negative thinking and replacing it with positive paradigms is quintessential for becoming successful. Starting from your personality and your role, you will learn about simple exercises you can use to change your negative paradigms into positive ones. Salesperson What is the primary goal of a salesperson? To increase sales. To do this, you must be good at networking and effectively communicating with others. Apart from that, you must also be able to influence the decisions of others. To do this, you need to have not only an acute sense of self-awareness but also an awareness of other desires. If your goal is to increase your sales, then any thinking pattern that doesn’t help you attain this goal is undesirable. Perhaps you doubt your ability to sell, or maybe you believe that the customer will never make a purchase. In such a situation, attaining your goal can become extremely tricky. To become a great salesperson, you need plenty of self-confidence. Confidence must come from within, and unless you truly believe in yourself and what you are pitching, others will have difficulty believing you. Any negative beliefs you have about yourself will effectively hinder your selling skills. If you seem meek, unsure of yourself, and fumble while talking, this won’t elicit confidence. Don’t let your negative thought patterns hold you back. Exercises Your Circle The company you keep matters. Past a certain age, who you are and how you interact with others is usually a direct representation of the kind of people you spend most of your time with. So, take some time and think about your different circles of friends. What do each of them represent? Are you surrounded by free-thinkers or followers? What are the different emotions brought by your colleagues and peers? How do the conversations usually? Are they filled with positivity or with unnecessary pessimism? If you believe you are surrounded by mostly negativity, then it is time to break free of this toxic energy you have voluntarily surrounded yourself. If someone doesn’t add to your growth as a person, make peace with it, talk to them, and move on. You cannot grow when others around you hold you back. Instead, surround yourself with people who bring about change, roundedness, and a sense of purpose. Seek out those with ambition and want more for their life and others. Dealing with Adversity Whenever faced with a challenge, it can be easy to give up or blame others for what you might lack. If you want to be a successful salesperson, then it is better you start questioning yourself. Whenever you face a setback in life, try to analyze the situation and yourself. Every setback is a lesson life is trying to teach you. Unless you learn this lesson, you are bound to make the same mistakes again. Whenever you face adversity, ask yourself, “What is good in this challenge? Then, ask yourself, “What is the lesson I have to learn?” Character growth and development occur only when you manage to learn from your mistakes. Keep in mind that adversities are unavoidable in life whereas optimism is a choice. Whenever you are faced with adversity, learn to change your response. Try to look for some humor in every situation. Dealing with a stressful situation increases the production of cortisol (stress-inducing hormone). The best way to diffuse such tension is by looking for some humor. When you learn to deal with a stressful situation using humor, it helps put all your challenges into a proper perspective. Taking Control If you find yourself thinking thoughts like: “I don’t have a good enough marketing strategy, “My competition is better,” or “My audience is lousy,” or “My territory is no good,” it merely reflects your inability to solve. If you believe that something external always guides your decisions and course of action, you can never be in control of the situation. If you want to be a successful salesperson, you need to understand that you are in control of your fate. Yes, there will be sometimes when it’s beyond your reach, but these situations will only get the better as you try to improve in your work. If business seems slow, it could be time to change your approach or redefine your efforts. Try meeting with seasoned professionals who can act like mentors in your field that are willing to share their experiences and guide you to a new approach. Stay open to change and be prepared to put in the hard work. Keep learning and improve your skills to outsell your competition. Unless you take control of your mindset, you won’t get ahead in this business. Replace the negative thoughts with more positive ones like, “I can always learn and improve my marketing strategies,” “If I work hard, I can improve myself,” or “I can find a way to connect with my audience.” A successful salesperson knows how to manage results and take control of the situation without making excuses. Manager Dealing with Staff As a manager, you must be able to not just convince your subordinates to stick with your plan of action but must be able to encourage and motivate them too. If you cannot do this, then you cannot be a successful manager. Any negative thought patterns you have could effectively hold you back and prevent you from successfully managing your team. Your success as a manager depends to a great extent on your ability to make the most of your team members. Even if you give your 100% but cannot make your subordinates contribute, then it is not going to get you anywhere. If you think others will not listen to you or don’t believe in your ideas, then it shows poorly on your managerial abilities. Taking a stand for yourself and voicing your opinions with confidence makes all the difference when it comes to leadership. If you don’t have confidence in your leadership abilities, then you cannot lead anyone. If you think no one will listen to you, then it will become incredibly difficult to make others listen to you. Exercises Challenge your Thoughts Negativity can creep in unannounced, and it can hit you like a ton of bricks. If your thoughts often start with words like “shouldn’t,” “will not,” or “cannot,” change the conversation. Whenever you start thinking this way, challenge the reasoning behind it. Ask yourself whether your thoughts are relevant to this moment. Is this productive? Once you have your answer, try to replace them with a positive vision. It might take a while, but eventually, you will be able to ignore negativity and instead concentrate on working towards a positive outcome. Conscious Monitoring Keep in mind that you are the manager and your team members count on you for guidance and support. Therefore, it is quintessential that you consciously monitor everything you say. You don’t always need to have an opinion or vocalize your thoughts. And at times, the best thing you can do is hold your tongue. For example, if you are worried about a project, then maybe it is better to express these worries far ahead. If you start looking worried, even your team will get worried. Negativity is as contagious as positivity. So, if you can keep your emotions and words in check, it will become easier to motivate and influence your team to work in the right direction. Always learn to save your 51/54 complaints about only those times when it is absolutely necessary to share them. By doing this, the chances of others rolling their eyes and ignoring you will certainly decrease. If you keep complaining all the time, then the complaint loses its power. Before you start expressing any negative thoughts, take a moment, and think about the kind of effect it would have on your team. Maybe you feel that once you express a negative thought, it will go away quickly. However, that thought can end up staying in someone else’s mind for a while longer. Breaking Down Problems When faced with a problem, it is easy to allow your thinking to spiral out of control. If you do, it’s unlikely that you will be able to control your reactions, and you will start concentrating on the things you cannot do right now. There are some things you can start working on now. Instead of worrying about what you can’t do, shift your view on what you can do. Keep in mind that success brings more success. So, give yourself and your team a chance to succeed. Whenever you face a complicated problem, start breaking it down into manageable chunks. For instance, if you have a major presentation due, and there is no time to complete it, concentrate on simplifying the task at hand. Instead of one big challenge, break it down into five manageable challenges. Whenever you complete one challenge, it will give you the positivity required to face the succeeding challenge. So, within no time, you have completed all the tasks and successfully tackle the big challenge. This kind of thinking is not just good for you, but your team too. An Employee Dealing With a Negative Boss Dealing with bosses is never easy, and it is even more difficult if you deal with a difficult boss. If you want to excel in your chosen profession, learning to deal with any type of higher up is a very important skill. You might desire to be the star employee or get a job that enables you to make the most of your skillset. It is never easy working under someone unless you have a good rapport with the right person. You probably aspire to be more successful or do some meaningful work that will make others take notice of you. If you want to stand apart from the crowd, you must be able to hold your ground. Dealing with negative thoughts and paradigms can be tiring. If you have convinced yourself that your boss doesn't like you, then you might lose interest in going to work or completing work on time. If you are riddled with self-doubt and regularly question every move you make or think you aren't suited for your job and responsibilities, you are self- sabotaging. Exercises Feed Your Mind Be extremely cautious of what you feed your mind and soul. Fill yourself with positivity and allow this positivity to propel you towards a positive future. If you are dealing with a negative workspace or dealing with negative paradigms, find a way to change the conversation. There are different ways to do this. You can use positive affirmations or even practice simple meditation. Whenever you feel negativity creeping in, take a break from your work, and concentrate on what you need at that moment to make yourself feel better. Before you accept a thought, question it. Don't blindly accept everything that you think to be the truth. Limit Interactions Negativity can spread very quickly if you are not careful. To prevent this, limit your personal exchanges with the negative boss as much as you can. Don't allow them to get into your mind. If someone is affecting you, regardless of their position or yours, you have already given them permission to do so. No one can make you feel bad unless you let them. You do this, unknowingly. Therefore, make a conscious effort to keep this negative person from entering your thought patterns. Ensure that your relationship is strictly professional and don't allow your personal life to interfere. Never make things personal, and don't try to get in with someone who doesn’t support you or is trustworthy. Don't try to change the way they think, and it is likely their own issues and nothing to do with you. The best you can do is try to brighten the mood when you do speak. If they try to go down the negative path, find a part in the conversation you can spin in a positive light. If it is a personal attack on you or your character, learn to stand your ground and make it known to a colleague that can help you or HR. And in the meantime, become the guardian of the thoughts and energy you let into your life. Learn to be Realistic It is easy to assume that the people who criticize you are envious or disturbed in a completely different aspect of their own lives. Keep an open mind and try to find the base for what you are being told as there might be an underlying truth that you missed. Even if your boss is a very critical person, their views might offer honest criticism you can learn from. Carefully reflect on the ideas you share in the workplace, and before you give someone a chance to be a critic, learn to be a critic yourself. If you're dealing with a difficult boss that looks for reasons why your ideas need work, understand being in a leadership position puts you under a magnifying glass and they are trying to get the best version of you out there. Don't feel bad about this, and don't allow the criticism to get the best of you. Instead, try to come up with constructive solutions. Think of a situation where your boss can/will point out five flaws and make sure you already have five solutions you can immediately offer. Loner It's never pleasant to feel like a social outcast. Maybe it makes you uncomfortable to socialize with strangers or anyone at all, and in turn, others feel uncomfortable around you. So, you might think it's easier to be alone. When you do get a chance to socialize with others, it becomes incredibly difficult for you to start a conversation or make worthwhile connections. If you feel others don't like you or that you aren't interesting enough to hold a conversation, it will harm your self-confidence, self-worth, and self-esteem. The only problem here is your lack of skills to express yourself clearly, or an inability to love yourself. The way you present yourself is the way others will perceive you. If you come across as being weak, others will think you are. If you have zero self-confidence, then they might try to take advantage or believe they can walk all over you. Exercises Practice Acceptance Learn to accept yourself the way you are. Keep in mind that you don't have to change because of what others think or believe. Everyone is entitled to their opinion and so are you. You don't have to fit into any preconceived notions others have about you or any societal notions. If something doesn't seem right to you, you can let it go. Unless you accept yourself the way you are, you cannot be happy with yourself. You cannot make friends unless you feel better about yourself. You cannot stand up for yourself and stop others from walking all over you unless you value yourself. Practice important conversations at home in the mirror or with a trusted friend to build up confidence. Everything is interconnected. So, start by accepting and loving yourself the way you are. Some people need a while longer to 52/54 recharge their batteries after spending time in public. If this is applicable to you, don’t worry and take the time you need. Don’t feel pressured to do anything you don’t want. Instead, learn to understand your likes and dislikes. Once you do this, it becomes easier to accept yourself. Practice Self-Care Regardless of what you do, make sure to spend some time taking care of yourself. Schedule at least 20 to 30 minutes of downtime for a self-care routine each day. By doing this, you'll notice your mood to change. Understand it’s your responsibility to engage in activities you enjoy. Think of it as a detox from the external world. Keep your phone off and out of sight and concentrate on the task in front of you. Until you are comfortable with yourself, you cannot expect others to be comfortable. Learn Quality vs. Quantity Don't try to measure your friend circle on quantity; instead, concentrate on developing and maintaining quality relationships. Even if you just have two really good friends, it’s better than being surrounded by ten people who don't care about you. So, start spending more time with the people you love. Identify any toxic relationships in your life and weed them. One meaningful conversation can make the difference in how a day plays out. It’s better to be on your own than with people who constantly bring you down or drain you of your energy. Enjoy Your Activities Think about your early life and what you enjoyed doing before the world started getting hard. Make a list of these activities. There could be a variety of reasons why you gave up on these hobbies but there is no time like the present. Brainstorm your interests now and find new ways to learn and make time to learn. Maybe you always wanted to learn how to draw, paint, or play an instrument. Enroll in a class, join a club, or watch videos online. Step out of your comfort zone and interact with others. In a class setting, you will likely find someone who shares the same interests as you and you can continue to develop outside of this space. Practice interacting with others, and don't allow negative paradigms to hold you back. Make a point to talk to one stranger a day, even if it's a casual exchange. 53/54 Conclusion T here is so much to learn about the psychological nature of people to prey on others. The truth is that all of humanity has the potential to victimize others. Yes, some try to sublimate this tendency while others choose to act upon their impulses. However, the most important thing for you is to understand your thoughts, perceptions, and feelings that lead to predatory behavior so that you can learn to control yourself and use it for good. One thing that is important to note is that manipulation often happens in families with parents who have narcissistic tendencies. In the case where there is parental alienation, a parent may use their child as a psychological weapon to abuse the other parent. The truth is that mind control, a form of dark psychology, happens in a system where people are - such as churches, families, and workplaces. The key ingredients of dark psychology are people, narcissistic leaders, lieutenants, scapegoats, and keeping secrets. What is not allowed in this kind of system is having a free spirit or free-thinking mentality. It is such kind of people who are banished from the community of manipulators. According to dark psychology, some people commit evil acts, not because of money, power, sex, retribution, or other known factors. Instead, they choose to do it because they are horrid - without a goal. In other words, for them, ends do not justify the means. These are the kind of people who injure others for the sake of doing it. Within each one of us lies this potential! You and I have the potential to harm others without cause, purpose, or explanation. This potential is considered complex - one that is even hard to define. One thing you must note is that your shadow self is always standing right behind you - just outside your view. When you stand indirect light, you cast a shadow, right. The shadow is the part of yourself that you can’t really see. Think about it for a moment, what lengths do you go to just to protect your self-image from unfamiliarity and flattery? The truth is, when you see another person’s shadow, you realize that one can show gifts in one area of life and remain unaware of their evil behaviors in certain areas. Everyone is susceptible to this. Over the years, I have learned that working with my shadow has not only been a challenging but rewarding process too. It is by looking at your darker side that you gain greater creativity, authenticity, personal awakening, and energy. It is this subjective process that contributes to your maturity. Realize that you cannot eliminate your darker side. Instead, it stays with you as your darker brother or sister. When we fail to see our darker self, that is when trouble ensues. While our shadow self can operate on its own without our awareness - more like it is on autopilot - it causes us to do things we would not do voluntarily, and that is the reason behind regret. You find yourself saying things you wouldn’t normally say. Your body language expresses emotions you would consciously not feel. In short, when you ignore your dark side, you end up hurting your relationships - with friends, spouse, or family, among others. 54/54