Manipulation and Dark Psychology by Davis, Kate 1/83 2/83 MANIPULATION AND DARK PSYCHOLOGY Your Complete Guide to Mastering the Art of Persuasion and Building a Better Life via NLP Secrets, Emotional Control, Hypnosis, Body Language, and Mind Control KATE DAVIS 3/83 Download the Audio Book Version of This Book for FREE If you love listening to audio books on-the-go, I have great news for you. You can download the audio book version of this book for FREE just by signing up for a FREE 30-day audible trial! See below for more details! Audible Trial Benefits As an audible customer, you will receive the below benefits with your 30-day free trial: FREE audible book copy of this book After the trial, you will get 1 credit each month to use on any audiobook Your credits automatically roll over to the next month if you don’t use them Choose from Audible’s 200,000 + titles Listen anywhere with the Audible app across multiple devices Make easy, no-hassle exchanges of any audiobook you don’t love Keep your audiobooks forever, even if you cancel your membership And much more Click the links below to get started! For Audible US For Audible UK For Audible FR For Audible DE 4/83 5/83 DISCLAIMER Kаtе Dаvis © Соpyright 2020. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 6/83 TABLE OF CONTENT DISCLAIMER INTRODUCTION CHAPTER 1 What’s Dark Psychology? CHAPTER 2 Why Is Human Interaction Important? CHAPTER 3 Persuasion CHAPTER 4 Psychotherapy Isn’t Harmful: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) CHAPTER 5 Influencing People Using Persuasion CHAPTER 6 Mind Control and Our Subconscious CHAPTER 7 Using Neuroscience in Mood Disorders, Aggression, and Anxiety CHAPTER 8 Using Neuroscience to Improve Mental Health Treatment CHAPTER 9 Writing as a Tool to Help Combat Fear and Anxiety CHAPTER 10 Positives of Dark Psychology CHAPTER 11 Female Behavior and Dark Psychology CHAPTER 12 Analyzing People Through Behavioral Psychology CHAPTER 13 Role of Emotional Intelligence in the Workplace CHAPTER 14 Use Your Emotional Intelligence to Increase Happiness FAQs ABOUT DARK PSYCHOLOGY CONCLUSION THANK YOU! MORE BOOKS BY KATE DAVIS ABOUT KATE DAVIS 7/83 INTRODUCTION The human personality is mind-boggling and fundamentally unique to every individual we’ll ever encounter in our lives. However, we all share traits that unite us. This book explains that, in general, all the psychological forces at work haven’t been cracked. We still suffer from mental illnesses, personality disorders, trauma, and other anxieties that haven’t yet been fully explored. And the prevalence of these psychological or psychiatric disorders affects our personalities and behavior daily. This book will also show how we can analyze people through their body language and behavior and explain persuasion and Dark Psychology. These are all fascinating subjects and will help to give an insight, not only into others’ minds but our own. 8/83 CHAPTER 1 What’s Dark Psychology? ark Psychology is a phenomenon whereby individuals use motivation, influence, control, and manipulation to get what they desire. Dark Psychology is an examination of the human condition; it identifies the mental approaches of individuals D who prey on others, motivated by criminality, psychopathy, or greed. All of humanity has the potential to victimize other people. While many restrictions limit or suppress this tendency, some follow their impulses. Dark Psychology tries to understand the thoughts, emotions, perceptions, and subjective processing systems that lead to predatory behavior that contradicts the current understanding of human behavior. Dark Psychology assumes that such predatory behavior is purposeful and that it has some rational and objective motivation 99.99% of the time. It’s the remaining 0.01%, the mistreatment of others without any seemingly logical intent, that Dark Psychology is most interested in. Dark Psychology assumes that there’s an area in the human mind that allows a few people to commit terrible acts for no reason. Dark Psychology states that all humans can execute their evil plan towards others, ranging from pushy and changeable behavior to pure psychopathic behavior without any enduring rationality. This is known as the “Dark Continuum.” Factors that act as accelerators and entice people to enter the “Dark Singularity,” and where an individual’s malicious activities fall on the Dark Continuum, is the thing that Dark Psychology calls the “Dark Factor.” Below is a brief introduction to these ideas about this aspect of the human condition’s darker side. All societies, all beliefs, and all people have some inherent evil-a dark side. Some have labeled it criminal, immoral, and pathological. Dark Psychology presents a third philosophical view that isn’t the same as religious dogmas or contemporary sociology hypotheses. Dark Psychology claims that some individuals commit these evil acts without any known purpose. It’s not because of power, money, sex, or any other available reason. Why do certain people take the opportunity to hurt others without a purpose or particular goal, clarification, or reason? This is the region where Dark Psychology tries to find the answers. Dark Psychology accepts that we all have the potential for predatory behavior, and this potential can enter our thoughts, emotions, and perceptions. If you’re honest with yourself, you’d admit that you’ve had ideas and opinions of committing horrific acts. We can all act upon this dark potential, but most of us don’t-thankfully. In reality, we see ourselves as benevolent; one would want to accept that these thoughts and emotions simply don’t exist. Dark Psychology presents us with some individuals who’ve got the same ideas, feelings, and perceptions, who don’t hesitate to pursue their evil plans. Dark Psychology labels that part of the human psyche or general human condition that allows predatory behavior. Notable features of this behavioral drive in various cases are the absence of an apparent rational impulse, its wholeness, and the loss of predictability and perception. Dark Psychology understands that this human tendency towards predatory behavior means we haven’t evolved as much as we’d like to say we have. Consider first that we evolved from animals, and now we consider ourselves to be the best of all animals. The frontal lobe of our brain has enabled us to do so. But this doesn’t completely separate us from our animal senses or predatory nature. According to evolution, all behaviors are related to three primary instincts: sexual, social, and self-preservation. These are the three fundamental drivers of man. Evolution follows the principles of survival of the fittest and replication of the species. Our mastery of knowledge and perception has brought out the best in ourselves and the worst of ourselves. In the animal kingdom, males fight to the death for territory or for power. All those acts, violent and brutal, are explained by evolution-survive or die. While animals hunt, they often hunt and kill the youngest, the weakest, or females. While this fact seems 9/83 psychopathic, the goal is to reduce their own chance of death or injury. All their cruel, drastic, and extreme actions correspond to the ideas of evolution, the instinct to survive, natural selection, and reproduction. In this study of Dark Psychology, we’ll learn about its application to the human species. Dark Psychology discusses that part of the human psyche or general human condition that allows predatory behavior. Philosophers and writers have tried to describe this phenomenon over the centuries. Only people can harm others without clear, rational motivation. Dark Psychology believes that part of a man feeds malicious and harmful behavior. Dark Psychology finds the dark side of people unpredictable. In understanding that working on these terrible impulses, and even more variable in length, some will go to them with their sense of grace, which is wholly denied. Some people torture, rape, murder, and violate for no reason or purpose. Dark Psychology talks about a man’s activities as a predator trying to hunt for no apparent reason. We humans are strangely dangerous to ourselves and even to other living things. The more the reader can imagine Dark Psychology, the better they’re designed to reduce their chance of exploitation by human predators. Before continuing, it’s essential to be aware of Dark Psychology. The following are six principles that are essential for understanding it: 1. Dark Psychology is a general part of the human condition and has an impact from the start. All societies, social orders, and individuals are living in support of this aspect of human health. The most good-hearted individuals have this field of evil; however, they never followed it and have lower frequencies of fresh ideas and emotions. 2. Dark Psychology is the examination of the human condition. It correlates with the thoughts, emotions, and perceptions of groups of people identified with this natural potential to hurt others without any cause. Since everything is purposeful, Dark Psychology suggests that the less the person stays in the “dark hole” of evil, the fewer opportunities there are for their purpose of inspiration. 3. Due to the possibility of distortion as abnormal psychopathy, the Dark Psychology in its inert structure can be overlooked. History is full of examples of this latent ability to discover themselves as active, dangerous behavior. Current psychiatry characterizes the psychopath as a predator without regrets. Dark Psychology states that there’s a continuum of seriousness that, for no reason, extends from ideas and emotions from destruction to extreme exploitation. 4. On this continuum, the importance of Dark Psychology isn’t considered less or more terrible by the manner of victimization, but it calculates a measure of cruelty. An honest description would analyze Ted Bundy and Jeffrey Dahmer. Both were extreme mental cases and horrifying in their activities. The bottom line is that Dahmer committed his murders because of his strange claim for friendship, while Ted Bundy murdered out of pure psychopathic evil. Both are higher up on the Dark Continuum, but Jeffrey Dahmer could be better understood for wanting to be loved. 5. Dark Psychology assumes that all individuals have the potential for cruelty. This potential is innate in all people, and different interior and exterior components increase the likelihood of this possibility being shown uncertainly. These practices are cruel, sometimes taking place for no reason. Dark Psychology accepts that humans distort the dynamics of predators and prey. Dark Psychology is exclusively a human phenomenon and isn’t shared by any other living being. Violence and cruelty can appear in other living things, yet humans are the main species that can do it for no reason. 6. An understanding of the unknown causes and triggers of Dark Psychology would better enable society to perceive, analyze, and mitigate the danger in its impact. Learning the ideas of Dark Psychology has a beneficial double function. For starters, by tolerating, we as a whole have the potential for insidious licensing for those with information to reduce the chance of ejection. Moreover, knowing the fundamentals of dark psychology fits with our unique developmental reason for staying. We’d probably teach others by raising their awareness, changing their existence to improve things, and inspiring them to teach others how to reduce their chances of falling victim to these evil forces and how Dark Psychology helps. We all have our dark sides as part of the human condition, but not usually shown or acted upon. As this author recently said, Dark Psychology encompasses all types of brutal and violent behavior. 10/83 This writer tries to look at Dark Psychology’s premise and nature to see how a healthy, intelligent person can get in the news with horrifying behavior that no one could’ve expected. It’s amazing how people with good mental health could interest or allow such violence. History shows that there are great atrocities. The destruction during World War II and the ethnic cleansing in neighboring countries are some examples. History has shown us examples of Dark Psychology in the world. As explained above, Dark Psychology is topical and alive and kicking, requiring a genuine discussion. As you continue to explore the principles and basics of Dark Psychology, a psychological structure of understanding will gradually emerge. The Dark Continuum The Dark Continuum is an essential part of understanding the dark side of humanity. The Dark Continuum is a hypothetical logical line or concentric circles that lie in all corrupt criminals and cruel behavior. The Dark Continuum contains thoughts, emotions, observations, and activities that are experienced or possibly commanded by people. The continuum varies from calm to extreme and from goal-oriented to aimless. Physical features of Dark Psychology fall on one side of the Dark Continuum and are becoming increasingly extreme. Mental appearances of Dark Psychology lie on one side of the continuum but can be just as damaging as physical actions. The Dark Continuum isn’t a scale of seriousness, but ranges from low to more horrible, but includes typologies of victimization in the plans and activities. When this author further expands his theory of the dark continuum, you’ve got a fairly represented line, describing all kinds of Dark Psychology that range from calm and purposeful to dangerous and aimless. The Dark Factor The Dark Factor is characterized as the domain, place, and potential within each of us, which is part of the human condition. This idea is one of the more conceptual terms of Dark Psychology because it’s so difficult to describe using the written form. A factor means to contribute causally to an outcome; different elements have determined effects. This author will try to extrapolate in a consistent tone for you what Dark Factor looks like after a condition. The Dark Factor is an exact condition, but a hypothetical one. The Dark Factor is something that a person encounters, which increases the ability to participate in violent behavior. While research has found that young people experiencing abuse in a violent family become abusers themselves, this doesn’t mean that every mistreated child becomes violent. It’s just a single aspect of many experiences and circumstances that contribute to the Dark Factor. The number of components associated with the Dark Factor condition is enormous. It’s not the number of parts that make Dark Factor outrageous; however, these encounters affect a person’s emotional processing makes the Dark Factor dangerous. These aspects include hereditary traits, relational traits, psychological insight, mutual acceptance, sensitive treatment, and developmental achievements and experiences. Human Interaction Man is a social animal. We want to connect with others for help, prosperity, and entertainment. But because our way of life is continuously evolving and relies on sophisticated tools, these honest interactions are at risk. Nothing compares to living in whole communities and investing real physical time with our loved ones. 11/83 CHAPTER 2 Why Is Human Interaction Important? or one specific, overriding reason, is human interaction essential-it’s for our emotional wellbeing. Through human contact, we adapt to pressure and radical changes in life, such as divorce, the birth of a child, and moving home. F Realizing that others value us is an essential subconscious factor that helps us overlook our lives’ negative sides and be more enthusiastic about our current situation. There’s compelling evidence that human contact is also fundamental to our physical wellbeing. report In a 2010 the Journal of Health and Wellness and Social Behavior, Debra Umberson and Jennifer Karas Montez, humanism analysts at the University of Texas at Austin, referenced the connection of poor quality or quantity of social bonds with a wide range of conditions, including cardiovascular disease, repeated coronary episodes, immune system problems, hypertension, cancer growth, and slow healing processes. in Four ways to improve the nature of your human connections 1. Use technology to encourage, not replace, social interaction. Whatsapp and Facetime are great applications; however, a relationship mainly dependent on electronic interaction is likely to fail. Use technology to promote shared experiences as an essential aspect of your family life. 2. Organize human interaction in both your professional and private life: schedule time for regular meetings, as well as for casual meals or a coffee. It’s expected that at these casual and informal encounters that we learn the most. 3. Meet up with individuals who make you happy. Positivity is infectious! Make time for friends or family with who you can share a relaxed, fun time. 4. Join a support network, or create one. Offer help and support to the people who need it. Body Language Body language refers to the nonverbal signs we use when communicating with someone face-to-face. Our gestures, facial expressions, tone of voice, the way we stand, walk, or sit can all reveal a great deal about our character, our inner thoughts, and emotions. Body language is said to represent between 60 and 65% of all communication. Understanding body language is essential. However, we must remember to consider everything in context. Interpretation of Body Language Facial Expression Think about how much a person can convey with just their face. A smile can show permission or joy. A frown can be a sign of fear or despair. In many cases, our facial expressions can expose our real emotions about a specific event. While you’re saying that you’re feeling well, the expression on your face can tell a very different story. Just some examples of emotions that can be communicated with facial expressions are: Joy Pain Insult Shock Disgust Anxiety Confusion Enthusiasm Desire Hate A person’s face can even help decide whether we trust or accept what the person says. A study found that the most genuine facial expression included a slight eyebrow lift and a small smile. Experts claim that this passes on both happiness and confidence. The facial expression also belongs to the universal body language types. The look used to convey fear, anger, suffering, and content is similar worldwide. Expert Paul Ekman has discovered the universality of various facial expressions related to specific feelings, including 12/83 joy, anger, fear, shock, and sadness. Research suggests that we make decisions about individuals’ intelligence, depending on their faces and expressions. A study found that people with narrow faces and prominent noses would undoubtedly be considered intelligent. Persons with a smiling, happy expression were also defined as more intelligent than those with angry emotions. The Eyes Eyes are often called the “windows to the soul.” This suggests that we place importance on them, allowing us to see their inner thoughts, feelings, and character into someone’s mind. During face-to-face interaction, observing someone’s eye movements can significantly enhance our interpretation of that person and the communication as a whole. Some things to look out for are if the person often turns their eyes away, the duration of eye contact, or whether their pupils dilate or not. Focus on these: Level and duration of eye contact: When someone looks directly at you during a discussion, it shows that they’re interested and present in the moment. However, delayed or infrequent contact may suggest reservation, disinterest, or uncertainty. Often looking away and turning away from time to time can show that they’re uncomfortable, distracted, or trying to hide their genuine feelings. If the other person’s gaze is intense and unwavering, it may mean that they’re trying to intimidate you. Blinking: Blinking is, of course, normal; however, you should note whether someone blinks excessively or too little. People tend to blink faster when they feel angry or uncomfortable. Infrequent blinking can show that a person is intentionally trying to control their eye movements. For example, a poker player may blink less often because he deliberately wants to appear unfazed by the hand he’s been dealt. Pupil size: This can be a primary nonverbal communication signal. The pupil (how dilated it is) can indicate if a person is feeling aroused, bored, or tired. The Mouth Mouth expressions and movements can also be fundamental in effectively reading body language. For example, biting the bottom lip can show that the individual experiences stress, anxiety, or instability. Covering the mouth can be an attempt to be polite when the person yawns or is eating, but it can also be an attempt to hide an expression of fear. A smile is perhaps one of the best signs of body language. However, smiling can be interpreted in many ways: it can be genuine, or it can convey false joy; it can be a sign of condescension; it can suggest playfulness, or it can denote cynicism. Lips and Mouth Tightening the lips can be a sign of disgust, objection, or doubt. Lip biting: Some people bite their lips when they’re concerned, scared, on the verge of tears, listening, or focused. Covering the mouth: When individuals need to hide an enthusiastic response, they can cover their mouths to avoid grinning or smiling. This can be disingenuous or a form of politeness. Mouth turned up or down: Small changes in the mouth area can also indicate what a person is feeling. The moment the mouth is turned up a little, it can mean that the individual feels loved or is hopeful. On the other hand, a slightly turned-down mouth can hint of misery, fear, or even disapproval. Gestures Waving, pointing, and shrugging are, for the most part, ordinary gestures that we use when communicating with other people. Here are some examples of a few natural gestures and their possible connections: A clenched fist can show anger or solidarity in certain circumstances. Thumbs up or thumbs down are often used as approval or disapproval signals. The “OK” gestures, made by inserting the thumb and index finger in contact with one another while broadening the other three fingers, can also be used to indicate ”OK.” However, a similar sign is used in some parts of Europe to suggest that you’re nothing. In some South American countries, it’s an insult. The V sign, made by the index and middle fingers to lift and isolate them to create the V shape, implies harmony and victory in some countries. In the UK and Australia, it’s offensive when the back of the hand is facing out. The Arms and Legs The arms and legs can also be valuable when communicating nonverbal information. Crossing the arms can be seen 13/83 as defensive. Crossing the legs can show hatred or discomfort. Extending out one’s arms could be a sign of intimidation while keeping your arms close to your body could be seen as an attempt to draw attention away from yourself. Pay attention to: Crossed arms can indicate that someone is feeling careful, self-defensive, or closed off. Hands-on-hips can signify that a person is in charge, but it can also be a sign of aggressiveness. Keeping your hands behind you can be a sign that you’re exhausted, unwell, or even feeling angry. Quickly tapping or squirming can indicate that a person is tired, anxious, or frustrated. Crossed legs can show that a person feels restrained or protected. Attitude The term refers to how we hold or carry our bodies. Attitude can convey an abundance of information about how a person is feeling and insights into personality traits. For example, sitting upright can show that a person is involved and concentrating on what’s happening. Sitting with the body leaning forward can, in turn, infer that the individual is exhausted or detached. While reading body language, try to focus on the signs that a person’s posture can radiate: Open posture means that the torso of the body remains open and uncovered. This kind of attitude shows kindness, clarity, and willingness. Closed posture means that the body’s torso is often covered by hunching forward and keeping the arms and legs crossed. This kind of attitude can signal unfriendliness, unpleasantness, or fear. Proxemics Have you noticed how different people have different ideas about personal space? term proxemics, coined by anthropologist Edward T. Corridor, refers The communicating. Just as body language and facial expression can convey various nonverbal data, so can this physical space between people. individuals’ distance while to Four degrees of social distance that occur under different circumstances: Short Distance - 6 to 18 inches: This degree of physical distance often shows a closer relationship or more prominent comfort between people. It usually happens during intimate contact, such as hugging or kissing. Personal Distance - 1.5 to 4 feet: The physical distance at this level usually happens between individuals who are family members or close friends. The closer the individuals feel at ease when communicating can be an indicator of the degree of connection in their relationship. Social Distance - 4 to 12 feet: Colleagues often use this degree of physical separation. In situations where you don’t know the other person well, for example, a postal worker you see once a month, a distance of 10 to 12 feet may feel comfortable. Public Distance - 12 to 25 feet: Physical range at this level is used regularly throughout public speaking interactions. Talking in front of a class full of students or giving a presentation at work are good examples. It’s essential to note that the individual distance people need to feel comfortable can vary from culture to culture. An example is a distinction between individuals from Latin American and North American communities. Individuals from Latin American countries will generally feel it important to get closer together when working together, while people from North America need to be further apart. Understanding body language can help you talk to others and interpret what they’re trying to convey. It’s imperative to look at these nonverbal cues that correspond to verbal communication, other nonverbal symbols, and the circumstances they’re communicating. You can also focus on becoming familiar with improving your nonverbal communication to get better at expressing what you feel-without having to say a word. 14/83 CHAPTER 3 Persuasion o you have an idea about what persuasion could mean? Some people might think of an advert on TV in which a celebrity is endorsing the latest perfume brand. On the other hand, others may think of a politician at a rally, trying to get voters to tick their name on the ballot paper. D Persuasion is an all-pervasive force in everyday life and affects us as individuals and society as a whole. Politics, ethics, mass media, social media, and advertisements are all influenced by persuasion. Under most circumstances, we like to think that we’re indifferent to persuasion, that we know our own minds, and can’t be made to do or say anything that we wouldn’t want to or choose to do ourselves. We believe that we know when someone is trying to persuade us to do something. That may be valid in certain situations, but persuasion doesn’t just mean a pushy salesman trying to sell you a third-rate vehicle or a TV ad tempting you to buy something you’ll probably only ever use once. Persuasion can be more stealth, more subtle than that, and how we respond to its effects can rely on several components. When we think of persuasion, it tends to have negative connotations, but influence can also be used positively. Government campaigns that encourage individuals to quit smoking are an excellent example of how persuasion can improve people’s lives. What’s Persuasion? I n The Dynamics of Persuasion, Richard M. Perloff describes persuasion as ”a symbolic process in which communicators try to convince other people to change their attitudes or behavior regarding an issue through the transmission of a message, in an atmosphere of free choice.” The critical components of persuasion, according to Perloff, are: It involves the transmission of a message (verbal or nonverbal). It’s a symbolic process. It involves an attempt to influence. People persuade themselves. It requires free-choice. Coercion Coercion is very different from persuasion in that it’s the practice of getting someone to do something against their will, usually by threats or by force. The perpetrator won’t be carrying out their actions for the victim’s benefit; it’s merely for selfish means. Coercion can have deadly consequences. The person who takes control of their victim usually won’t stop until they get what they want. And if they can’t get what they want, they may see the victim as entirely disposable. Coercion Tactics How do the persuaders carry out their tactics? That depends on what they want and who they’re trying to get it from. They’ll usually first “soften up” their victim and get them to be more suggestible. They’ll then try to control the victim through their social environment, usually by isolating them from their family and friends. They may try to “break down” the individual and make them reinterpret their whole idea of “self.” The victim will be made to feel an overwhelming sense of powerlessness and will suffer punishments if the persuader’s demands aren’t met. Finally, the use of intimidation, such as threats of violence, will “seal the deal” in terms of the persuader succeeding in getting what they want. 15/83 Reading Visual Cues and Other Behavior When someone closes their eyes while talking to you It could be that they’re trying to hide something from you, and you need to look out for other tell-tale signs that they could be being dishonest. However, some people close their eyes while talking to go “inside” themselves to better connect with their thoughts and feelings. Therefore, it could just mean that they’re thinking. When someone covers their mouth with one hand You tend to cover your mouth if you don’t want to share something with someone. It’s like a literal barrier between your words and the outside world. Sometimes, this is also achieved by fake coughing. When someone chews the arms of their glasses This can be a sign that someone is nervous, scared, or needs to be cheered up. Chewing our glasses, a pen, or even a cigarette is a throwback to when we were nursed by our mother; it gives us comfort. When someone cups their face Usually, this is a sign used to seduce someone. Often, when we put our chin on our hands, we’re presenting ourselves and saying, “This is me!” So, if you’re talking to someone you like, and they make this gesture, try your luck -chances are, they’re into you too! When someone rubs their chin This is a sign of someone undecided or faced with a choice they’re not sure about. They barely know where they are and are completely lost in their thoughts. When they crossed their arms This is a defensive gesture; the person is closing themselves off from other people and the world. Sometimes it’s done out of annoyance, sometimes uncertainty, and occasionally pure contempt. When they lean forward If we like someone and want to make eye contact with them, we’ll lean towards them. Even if the legs aren’t moving forward, the body will automatically lean forward. When they lean back in their chair This usually means that they’re bored or disengaged. Sometimes, it can be a sign of shock at what they’ve just been told. When someone jiggles their feet up and down This is done when someone is nervous, impatient, or anxious. When they rub their hands together It’s said that the hands always pass on what’s going on in the head. When someone rubs their hands together, it usually means that they’re feeling optimistic, or confident, or joyful. When they put their hand on your’s If while talking to someone, and they sense that you’re unhappy or sad, and they touch you on your hand or wrist, it usually means that they’re empathetic and that you can trust them. When they give you a top-handed handshake Their hand is placed horizontally, and therefore on top of yours. This means that the person is asserting their authority or that they feel superior to you. The same can also be said for people who squeeze too hard when they’re shaking your hand or hold onto it for too long. When a man touches his tie The meaning of this sign depends on the circumstance. Touching the tie is a form of self-soothing and could indicate that the man has seen a woman he likes, feels uncomfortable, he’s lying, or that he wants to get out of the situation. When someone picks at hair or dust that isn’t there People do this to express that they’re upset, but they don’t want to show it. When they put their feet on the table or desk 16/83 This type of gesture can signify many different things: bad manners, trying to show who’s boss, being disrespectful, feeling relaxed, or even just trying to rest their legs. Even if you feel comfortable doing this, it’s probably best not to do it outside the comfort of your own home because of its many negative connotations. When someone sits on their chair like it’s a horse Obviously, the chair isn’t a horse, but this seated position can signify an attempt to look strong and in control. They may do this because they feel threatened or to simply assert their authority. When a woman plays with her shoe on her foot She’s probably doing this to draw attention to her legs. It could signify that she’s interested in the person she’s talking to and that she’s comfortable with herself. Eye contact The eyes are the mirror of the soul and a great way to communicate. A person can understand and read the emotional states and feelings of a person by “reading” their eyes. People who love each other gaze into each other’s eyes, hoping to see dilated pupils, indicating that someone is aroused or interested. When a person is irritated or is disinterested, their pupils get very small. By looking into someone’s eyes, you’ll get a better idea as to what they think of you. Be objective and flexible Never prejudge people. When you first meet someone, go in with an open mind. Your feelings and past experience can influence your impressions and perceptions of people. If you judge people too quickly, it’ll lead you to all kinds of misconceptions. Be objective in every communication, interaction, and situation. You don’t get the full story about someone from just their words. You need to gather all the evidence-verbal and nonverbal cues-to get a better idea about a person and where they’re coming from. Pay attention to their appearance Look at how someone is presenting themselves through their clothing and accessories. Are they dressed for success, indicating that they’re determined, self-assured, and driven? Or are they dressed casually in a T-shirt and jeans, showing that they’re relaxed or ready for a good time? Do they have a pendant around their neck that signals their beliefs? Do they have tattoos or piercings? How have they done their hair? How people express themselves in their daily dress can say a lot about their character and philosophy to life. Pay attention to people’s attitudes A person’s attitude, the way they carry themselves, says a lot about their personality. If they keep their heads held high, it indicates that they have confidence. If they walk indecisively or slouch, it could be a sign of low morale. We need to notice and observe people’s physical movements; people tend to express their emotional state through their actions. Interpreting facial expressions Unless you’re a true master of the poker face, your feelings will come through to your face. Accordingly, there are plenty of facial expressions to look out for to get a better insight into other people. Deep frown lines suddenly emerging means the person is concerned or thinking deeply. Pursed lips can signal anger, contempt, or bitterness. Also, a clenched jaw and teeth are signs of tension. A pleasant, genuine smile means that the lips are pulled straight up, some teeth show, and creases appear around the eyes. Small talk A brief conversation about something inconsequential helps you detect how a person behaves under normal circumstances. You can then use it as a default to accurately identify any behavior that deviates from their normal baseline. 17/83 CHAPTER 4 Psychotherapy Isn’t Harmful: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) he organized nature of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and the apparent end values based on the relationships between minds, emotional state, and behavior make it relatively simple for physicians to use and ensure its standardized distribution. T CBT has revolutionized mental health, allowing psychologists into a discipline. There’s now a significant sign that CBT is as real or complementary as medication for many mental illnesses. It’s like any analysis procedure; CBT isn’t affected by the risk of unwanted side effects. the alchemical treatment turn to A new paper in Cognitive Therapy and Investigation plans the nature and occurrence of these undesirable things, based on organized meetings with 200 analysts trained in CBT. It’s what psychoanalysts need to know when informing their patients about the future benefits and risks of treatment. The researchers asked each CBT therapist, 78% of whom were female, usually 32 years old, with five years of knowledge, to remember their newest client who’d attended at least ten sessions of CBT. The selected customers often identified unhappiness, nervousness, and some form of complaint about their character. Psychotherapists regularly reported 4.7 unsolicited events per client. Based on the psychotherapists, which are his descriptions, the investigator then appreciated the likelihood that unwanted individual cases are directly attributable to the healing mode while yielding an actual lateral outcome; only those considered to be related to the treatment were recognized as such. Most researchers predicted that 4% of clients had experienced at least one undesired side effect of CBT, an average of up to 0.17 per client who often suffers, worsens, and becomes overburdened by family members. More than 40% of the side effects were rated severe and very apparent, and more than a quarter lasted for weeks and months. However, the mainstream was insignificant for fair and volatile. ”Psychotherapy isn’t harmless,” the researchers said. There was no warning the principle. that any of the assets repeat of from a resulted Examples of severe side effects included suicidality, fragmentation, family members’ unwanted reaction, removal of family members, ghosts of shame and blame, and desperate and expressive problems at meetings. Dark NLP These disciplines have long been the secret of many. Some of the most devastating insights into the human mind are hidden in the pages of scientific journals. Proven ways to reveal your deepest desires and keep up to date with their pursuit are quickly escalated for you. It’s perhaps the best chance to control your life once and for all. Act now before anyone else does. 18/83 HYPNOSIS AS BEHAVIOR AND COGNITIVE THERAPY The goals of this psychological intervention should be: 1. To eliminate any pain, or more often significantly lower; 2. Do this work without accumulation of side effects, namely, an increase in pain level or a decrease in patient activity; 3. Strengthen the impact of other treatments the patient receives; 4. Ensure the patient can use all of this themselves so that they’re much more confident and less dependent on his medical and psychological environment. Making the patient active and giving them a sense of control in the care process is a fundamental part of approaches such as hypnosis. We define painful experience as continuity between perception and interpretation of the subject. Pain is both a sensation and an emotional experience, and pain is always subjective. This cerebral culmination of the painful feeling explains the different characteristics of suffering experienced differently by each individual in a strictly personal way. Psychological techniques require a lot of time and effort from both the patient and the doctor. Nevertheless, they’re an essential part of pain therapies’ arsenal, especially when confronted with these painful conditions that are rebellious for pharmacological treatments. We’ll succinctly define what the cognitive approach is and then the behavioral approach under these psychological approaches. The clinical hypnosis in the pain center of the University Hospital of Rouen fits into these two dimensions. COGNITIVE APPROACHES Cognitive techniques are concerned with inner speech, internal dialogue, the monologue that accompanies and often precedes action. They’re intended to suppress or reduce the patient’s anxiety and depression. To approach what they consider to be a dysfunction of thinking, the therapist must somehow enter the world of the patient’s representations, adjust what the subject says to themselves, and lead them to stick to more realistic inner words. Asking questions about their “pain” will be a crucial moment. In essence, the disease’s meaning, the uncertainty about its evolution (functional disability, fear of death) are all factors that’ll modulate the affective component of pain. However, to give it therapeutic efficacy, it’s common to use behavioral methods in which this restructuring of thinking takes place from tasks presented to the subject. THE BEHAVIORIST APPROACH With fruitful results and following Pavlov’s work and then Skinner’s, it forms a coherent system, the cornerstone of which is the concept of reinforcement. A symptom is considered “learned,” but inappropriate behavior; an effort will, therefore, be made to replace it with a better-adapted response. For example, the positive reinforcement factors can be summarized with the following formula: “When I suffer and only when I suffer, I receive interest and understanding from others (medical care, rest, attention of loved ones, financial compensation, the care of therapists, all positive reinforcing factors).” Reinforcing negative factors can be expressed as follows: “When I’m in pain, I avoid difficult situations (at work, in a relationship, etc.).” The conditioned reflex is a cornerstone of behaviorism. The human nervous system learns through repetition, and learning is a design process in people. When a specific event has occurred, mental impressions are formed, which promote recurrence under similar circumstances. Likewise, emotional affairs are conditioned. The stored feelings can be displayed indefinitely throughout life as if they were old recordings. This automatic replay continues until we highlight our events at these events and rearrange our order in the past, erasing the recordings that have become useless. According to Milton H. Erickson, old and persistent pain in any part of the body can lead to all feelings in this area being interpreted as painful. The initial pain may have disappeared a long time ago. Still, the recurring experience of this initial pain leads to the formation of a habit that, in turn, can lead to painful and somatic disorders. The operant conditioning techniques are based on the observation that intricate behavioral patterns can be changed using rewards and punishments. Hypnosis acts on our feelings and sensations, it modifies our cognitive patterns, and provides us with different 19/83 behaviors to pain. 20/83 THE USE OF HYPNOSIS IN THE TREATMENT OF PAIN The use of hypnosis in medicine is ancient. But let’s go back to the 19th century when doctors started to consider the patient’s pain and tried to fix it. Their research goes in two directions: a psychological or psychophysical approach, such as animal magnetism, and then hypnosis. At that time, several surgical procedures were performed under anesthesia, such as mental analgesia. At the same time, pharmacological solutions were discovered. The use of nitrous oxide was revealed in the 19th century as anesthesia and ether by Morton and Jackson. Simpson used chloroform to help Queen Victoria during her third and fourth deliveries. Around the same time, Corning devoted a series of works to the epidural. Until recently, the French public and the medical world avoided hypnosis, mainly because of a lack of knowledge stimulated by shows in the music hall and the anathema caused by psychoanalysts. In the Anglo-Saxon world and the countries of the East, hypnosis was taught at universities and used in medicine and psychology. Definition of hypnosis It’s a unique mental state with specific physiological characteristics. It resembles a sleep-like state and is distinguished by the person’s action with a different degree of consciousness than the standard condition of knowledge. An increase in susceptibility and sensitivity describes this condition; our inner perception is just as imaginative as a general rule. Two allegories to delineate the trance-like state: “a waking visionary/dreamer,” he checks his visualization; and “an alert sleeper,” he seems to have a relaxed sleep, but with an intensely active imagination. At this time, several miracles can happen, suddenly in the subject or suggested by the hypnotherapist, such as: A work about memory: remembering, sometimes missing; Time twist: narrowing or extending the time; Movement in age: make projections later or later you see yourself; A relapse: returning to the past; Sedation: losing feeling; A presence of pain: the experience of the disappearance of torment The enchanting act Therefore, each hypnotic session has two perspectives: the subject’s relationship with the trance specialist and the psychophysiological changes they achieve in the issue. The social perception that the hypnotist has complete control is false. A functioning state is enchanting. It’s a state where several miracles happen; however, nothing happens without the patient’s coordinated effort. The latter will recognize following our proposition to the extent that it allows for itself and with its ethics. Hypnotherapy is a relationship. The subject must believe in the actions of the specialist. The ability to be hypnotized depends on the simplicity with which an individual can absorb an external stimulus and become one with it. Numerous techniques have been used to induce a trance-like state. Their motivation is to establish the treatment of the subject and, in this way, narrow their area of ​consciousness. Hypnotic work in the treatment of pain Applications The applications of this hypnotic capacity are numerous. In obstetrics, we can use hypnotic analgesia in preparation for childbirth. In surgery, hypnotic suggestion can replace chemical anesthesia in some rare, if not exceptional cases; in all cases, it constitutes a psychological factor that promotes relaxation conducive to anesthesia and promotes post-operative awakening. It can, therefore, be used to prepare a patient for surgery and to reduce post-operative pain. In dental care, the intervention is greatly facilitated by analgesia’s suggestions: almost all attention is feasible in subjects capable of hypnotic analgesia. For the treatment of burns victims, the use of hypnosis can be significant. Two options for hypnotic treatment depend on the type of pain (chronic or acute): 1. Either learning, over several sessions, to reduce or avoid the pain. 2. An external method, built during a GP consultation or at the dentist’s, or even extreme care in the hospital. Using hypnosis for chronic pain For chronic pain patients, the goal of hypnosis treatment is to realize that they can respond to their pain, gain control and relieve anxiety, and rearrange their lives by interpreting the nociceptive stimulus. If the hypnotic state’s induction can occur in all patients, hypnotic suggestions regarding pain, memory, or other 21/83 psychological functions are chosen based on the patient’s speech. From the language of the patient and the description of their pain, the hypnotherapist has a large number of possible indications: With analgesia, you can keep sensations without pain: “With analgesia, you create a kind of excitement, no loss of touch, no loss of pressure sensation, no loss of kinesthetic feeling, no damage other than the pain itself.” Fractionation represents the gradual reduction in pain: “You can continue to feel more comfortable with each exhalation, almost as if the discomfort is something that gradually fades away.” The dissociation moves the mind away from the body or the painful part of the rest of the body: “You leave your body here, your mind can travel, you’re at home, elsewhere ...” Amnesia is about memories of past pain: “The best way to deal with unpleasant feelings is to forget them, like when you go to the movies and get completely absorbed in the drama, you forget your headache ...” The distortion of time will shorten the time of the painful crises: “Let your body appreciate these rest periods, which get longer and longer ...” The sensory replacement replaces the painful sensation with an always uncomfortable feeling, but more acceptable: “The sensations you describe ... can change surprisingly ... Instead of this burning sensation, your body may experience numbness ...” 22/83 PERSUASION, MANIPULATION, MIND CONTROL, AND THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND Persuasion In general, we tend to believe that persuasion, and thus the techniques of which it’s composed, is used for manipulative, selfish reasons; however, this isn’t entirely true. For example, sometimes it’s required to seal a deal at work, have good, meaningful friendships, and get someone to change their habits to improve their lifestyle. It can be used for good, positive, productive reasons and have beneficial outcomes for many people. Persuasion can be seen as an art, a talent, and one you can develop with the right tips and knowledge. It’s generally a force for good-a prosocial tool. It tends to advance the positions of everyone involved-both the persuader and the person being persuaded. Manipulation On the other hand, manipulation is very different from persuasion-it’ll harm the person being subjected to it. Manipulation is used to trick, control, or coerce the other person into doing or thinking something they ordinarily wouldn’t do or believe. Manipulating someone isn’t quick and easy. It consists of closing the victim off mentally, socially, and physically from their family, friends, and the rest of the world. In other words, the individual becomes vulnerable, defenseless prey. With less and less contact with other people, and with their life now limited to being at the manipulator’s beck and call, the victim doesn’t have that many options to choose from. Their sense of self and self-worth and their capacity to think for themselves will be severely diminished. They’ll feel trapped and entirely dependent on their manipulator. Anyone has the potential to manipulate, but most choose not to do so. A person who decides to carry out such acts will be prepared to set aside any qualms about hurting other people or using devious, ruthless means to get what they want. The manipulator’s groundwork A manipulator will initially carry out the following to “hook” and “reel in” their victim: Feign friendliness: The manipulator will pretend to be friendly and pleasant. They’ll intentionally hide the darker sides to their character, such as aggressiveness. Getting to know the victim: The manipulator will be attentive and listen closely to what their victim tells them about themselves. They’ll create a bond with their victim to get them to open up and reveal their vulnerabilities (which the manipulator will then exploit). The victim will probably find them charming and a good listener. Ways a manipulator controls their victim The victim will often find themselves involved in a merry-go-round of emotions and positive reinforcement (praise, gift- giving, excessive apologizing, fake sympathy, fake smiles, etc.) and negative reinforcement (removing them from a negative situation as a reward) from the manipulator. The aim of using these tactics is to gain complete control over their victim. They’ll eventually wear the victim down emotionally, psychologically, and physically. The victim will be left feeling vulnerable (yet dependent on their manipulator), fearful, with low self-esteem and a lack of sense of self. Some other ways that the manipulator uses control are: - Creating a climate of fear or doubt: by partial or intermittent negative reinforcement. - Punishment: usually verbal abuse or emotional blackmail. - Traumatic one-trial learning: using intimidation to establish dominance. Even just one such instance can be so traumatic that the victim learns to avoid upsetting their manipulator. - Lying. - Refusal to admit they’ve done something wrong (will usually place the blame on the victim). - Rationalizing and minimizing their bad behavior. - Selective attention or disattention (according to their own agenda). - Diversion/evasion tactics in conversations (won’t give straight answers/will avoid giving answers). - Covert intimidation, such as veiled threats which makes the victim feel vulnerable. - Guilt-tripping to make the victim feel sorry for their manipulator or feel guilty. - Verbal shaming. - Vilifying the victim/playing the victim. - Blaming others/creating scapegoats. - Pretending to be confused/innocent if their victim confronts them about something. - Controlled anger: feigning anger to get the victim to do what they want. - Peer pressure/bandwagon effect: convincing the victim to do something because many other people have done it before. The victims What part of us makes us susceptible to the actions of master manipulators? Manipulators tend to seek out people that they think possess certain character traits/vulnerabilities that they can exploit for their own ends. These include: 23/83 - Being a people-pleaser and caring about what other people think of them. - Emotophobia: the fear of expressing negative emotions, such as fear, anger, etc. - Lack of assertiveness. - Low sense of self (self-identity) and low self-confidence. - Co-dependency on others. - Naïve and too trusting of others. - Over-intellectualization: they try too hard to understand their manipulator and rationalize their behavior and motives. - Lonely. - Narcissistic: they respond to the manipulator’s initial attempts at flattery. - Altruistic. - Greedy: they’ll fall for the manipulator’s tactics if they think that there’s something for them to gain in the material sense. - The elderly. What motivates a manipulator Unlike its more benign cousin, persuasion, manipulation doesn’t tend to be used for positive social influence. In most cases, it’s used for purely individual gains, whether that be material, psychological, or physical. Sometimes, it’s purely done for “kicks.” Let’s take a look at some possible motives: - The desire to get what they want, no matter the personal cost to other people. - The need for power and control over others. - Boredom. - A covert agenda, such as criminal activity. - Underlying emotional issues, such as fear of commitment. - Lack of self-control regarding antisocial behavior: manipulation is a form of damage control. - Psychopathy. - In the workplace: sometimes used by people to instill fear or disharmony or climb up the ranks. - Personality disorders: people with antisocial, borderline, and narcissistic personality disorders share traits that include exceptional abilities to deceive and manipulate. Lack of empathy and impulsivity are also common. Sufferers may use manipulative tactics to gain control, power, revenge, or material rewards. - Histrionic personality disorder: despite having good social skills and usually functioning well in both their personal and professional lives, sufferers from this disorder tend to use their capabilities to manipulate others so that they’re the center of attention. - Machiavellianism: a person’s tendency to lack empathy, sympathy, conventional morality, and being prone to deception and manipulation. 24/83 CHAPTER 5 Influencing People Using Persuasion o you have a fantastic business idea that you need to pitch? Are you trying to get people to RSVP to your event, but to no avail? Or do you want to find a way to avoid getting scammed by dishonest salespeople? Dr. Robert Cialdini’s research into the science of persuasion led him to identify six principles that guide human D behavior. These principles can be used ethically to increase the chances of influencing someone through persuasion. Cialdini’s principles of persuasion are: 1. Reciprocity Give, and you shall receive is the thinking behind this principle. People feel obligated to give back to others if they’ve received a gift, a favor, an offer, or a service. Costco, for example, uses this tactic in their stores. They’ll often give out free samples of certain food items, knowing that the customer will return the favor by either buying the product or returning to the store in the future. 2. Scarcity People want more of what they can’t have. Making something seem unique, rare, or limited increases its appeal tenfold. People don’t want to feel like they’re going to miss out on a product, service, or opportunity. 3. Authority People will listen to those who they believe are credible, knowledgeable experts on something. The Milgram experiment studied obedience to authority figures. Participants were randomly selected to either be the “learner” or the “teacher.” In fact, the “learner” participants were Milgram’s own colleagues pretending to be real participants. The learner had (fake) electrodes attached to their arms, while the teacher and researcher went into another room that contained a (fake) electric shock generator. The teacher was then to test the learner on a list of pair words that they’d been given to memorize. The teacher was told to administer an electric shock every time the learner made a mistake and increase the voltage with each error. Whenever the teacher refused to issue a shock, they were urged to do so by the researcher. In this instance, the teacher viewed the researcher as an authority figure. They were dressed in a lab coat, signifying their position as a qualified scientist. The results were shocking; the vast majority of participants continued to deliver electric shocks at the researcher’s urging. The Milgram experiment proves the power of authority. We look up to people we perceive as more knowledgeable, more experienced, and more qualified than us. 4. Consistency People like to be consistent with things they’ve committed to doing previously. Often, consistency is best achieved by getting people to put their commitment down in writing. 5. Likability This is perhaps the most obvious; the more you like someone, the more likely it is that you’ll do something for them. According to Cialdini, how much we like someone depends on three factors: - Their similarity to us. - How complimentary they are towards us. - How much they show cooperation with us towards mutual goals. Other ways you can up your likeability factor: Be engaging. Be attentive. Keep in contact and follow-up with people. 6. Consensus “If others are doing it, it must be good.” Particularly if people are uncertain, they’ll look around them to see what other people are doing. Tip jars rarely get money put into them if there isn’t already some in there. So, restaurants and street buskers will make sure to already put some change into their jars before starting work. 25/83 These principles can be applied by people in both professional and personal settings. Persuasion, if used ethically, can be for the mutual benefit of all involved. 26/83 A BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO MIND CONTROL AND MARKETING As we’ve discovered, there’s a science behind persuasion. In the 1980s, Dr. Robert Cialdini wrote the book Influence. The Psychology of Persuasion outlining the principles guiding how people can influence or be influenced. Since then, it’s become an essential book in the field of marketing and promotion. We could even stretch so far as to call marketing a form of “mind control.” All the marketer has to do is get someone to say “Yes,” and then they’ve done their job. And the methods in which they can do this can all be learned here. Do the customer’s thinking for them People have already got enough on their plates that don’t need anything else added to the pot. So, when you present something to them and say, “Think it over, I’ll get back to you,” chances are, they won’t. Instead, be proactive, creative, and do pretty much everything for them except for signing on the dotted line. For example, if you want a testimonial from a customer, chances are they’re going to be too busy to make it their priority. However, if you send them a couple of templates to choose from, which they can then personalize, they’ll be more likely to complete that little task for you. They’re going to say yes because you’ve done pretty much all the thinking for them. Start an avalanche In other words, work as hard as you can to get your first “Yes,” because once you’ve got it, you’ll find that it has a snowball effect that’ll eventually lead to an avalanche of yeses. It’s the opposite of the strategy many promoters use- working from the bottom up-but will be doubly effective in a shorter amount of time. One example of this would be getting an Instagram influencer to promote your product. It’ll probably be a nightmare at first, trying to reach out to her and get her to become involved. But once she says yes, your product will be presented to thousands and thousands of potential customers. Ask for an inch, take a mile Yes, you read that correctly. What this means is when you ask for something, don’t ask for all of it upfront. It offers both you and the customer more of a risk-free, relaxed commitment, which makes them more likely to give the initial “Yes.” For example, if you want your customers to give testimonials, start off by asking them for just a 1-3 sentence piece of content. You can then start gradually asking for a bit more until you’ll find that you’re able to convince them to do a full-on webinar for you. Always have a real deadline And this means real. No, “I need your answer by the end of this week because I’ve got a lot of other clients who’re interested.” You’re not fooling anyone with that line. When it sounds like you’re bluffing, your customer is less likely to want to do business with you. Instead, make it clear that there’s a real deadline and that the client needs to act sooner rather than later. For example, if promoting a special offer on your website, don’t just put “Special offer, get it while stocks last!” write, “Special offer until May 30, act fast!” Give more than you take The ratio here shouldn’t be 1:1; it should be 10:1. This goes for value, as well as for action. For example, to get one all-important customer testimonial, do ten amazing acts of customer service. Generosity breeds generosity. Stand for something bigger than yourself Make sure you’re doing something which benefits more than just yourself or your business. Use your platform, your influence, to do good. Of course, this has the added benefit in that it draws people closer to you. Potential clients will want to get involved in helping you spread the word. For example, instead of just writing another blog post, take an issue close to your heart, and use your creativity and platform to spread awareness. Shamelessness This means that you totally believe in what you’re doing, and you’ll stop at nothing to spread the word and get people involved. It involves tireless promotion and dogged determination. But it’s what you’ve got to do because this is about bringing your vision, your dream, alive. So, there we have it. Using the skills of persuasion, mind control, influence-whatever you want to call it-can help you promote yourself or your business. And the best thing about it? There’s no manipulation, there’s no deceit. Just a 27/83 little bit of hard work and perseverance on your side, and a satisfying pay-off for everyone involved. 28/83 CHAPTER 6 Mind Control and Our Subconscious O ur subconscious knows the sources of our happiness; our conscious mind is often not capable of the same. We need our subconscious and conscious minds to work together to indeed find happiness and fulfillment. The subconscious is where our attitudes, emotions, and outlook on life are held, so we can use it to focus on what’s essential by gaining control of it. We’ll be able to rid ourselves of our fears, our negativity, and all the things holding us back from reaching our full potential. Often negative emotions like fear, loss of hope, loss of faith in people prevent us from focusing on the positives. They stop us from attaining happiness in our lives. Once we can control our subconscious mind, we can control our mind and ourselves. Mind control techniques: The following are some mind control techniques that you can practice to help improve your life. 1. Visualization If we imagine or visualize we’re achieving success, we can train our minds to work towards achieving it. It works for sports athletes, and it can work for you, too. 2. Meditation Meditation is one of the oldest mind-control techniques. It works by calming the mind and emptying it of all thoughts. In that space, peace and tranquility will enter. Meditation quietens that nagging voice in our head and gives the subconscious mind a voice instead. Scientific studies show that the mind’s production of alpha waves peaks after mediation. These waves enrich inventive and positive thinking. Through meditation, the brain can focus on the present. 3. Positive self-talk You can either be your best friend or your worst enemy. Negative self-talk becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. If you don’t respect yourself, who else is going to? Talk to yourself like you’d a friend or a loved one: speak positively, use encouraging words, make yourself feel good. Your mind will feed on this and focus on what’s achievable, and work toward that goal. 4. Self-hypnosis Self-hypnosis and the repetition of one mantra work like meditation: it frees your mind of unnecessary thought and allows you to focus. 5. Goals and continuous self-evaluation Writing down our goals makes them more real. By continuously reviewing our goals and the progress we’re making to achieve them, we’ll be able to make the necessary changes. By assessing the progress made, you can keep your goal constant and stay positive. *** Mind management techniques are used effectively to cure various conditions, relieve acute pain, and reduce stress. They can significantly help in keeping your mind uncluttered, positive, and focused. The wonderful thing is, these techniques can be learned at any time in our lives and can be practiced daily in the comfort of our own homes. Most success stories relate in some way or another to the application of mind control techniques. As you’ve already read, by harnessing the power of the subconscious mind, we can directly influence the quality of our life. Nothing in life is more satisfying than relaxing in the freedom and awareness that you’re using your mind to its full potential and that you’re truly connected to your inner self. As we’ve seen, this isn’t achieved by trickery. It’s done using techniques to empty your mind of unnecessary, negative thoughts and replace them with grounded, positive ones. It’s best to stick to a daily routine of practicing your preferred mode of mind control to ensure you achieve and maintain clarity and the right perspective. The realm of a person’s subconscious mind is analogous to that of a giant sponge. It absorbs each and every experience we’ve ever encountered-good or bad. 29/83 The subconscious supports whether we realize success in our life or not. While you work to implement your mind control techniques, you’re ready to clear out the old, “useless” knowledge and replace it with a new state of mind. Think of it as your mental warehouse, where you can store all the tools and information to help you achieve your goals. It’s a unique way to guarantee success with the freedom of mind that you’ve always wanted. You can be confident that the results won’t only be exceptional-they’ll be life-changing. Try it and reap the benefits. You’ve nothing to lose except negativity and everything to gain. Mind control techniques to be aware of We’ve discussed how we can use mind control on ourselves to infinitely improve our own lives. However, others can use mind control techniques on us that can destroy our lives. The following techniques can be used by individuals in interpersonal settings such as a romantic relationship and in group settings, such as religious cults. We must all be aware of these mind control methods, as we run the risk of manipulation and abuse if they manage to take hold of us. Isolation Even if physical isolation isn’t possible, a manipulator can emotionally isolate their victim. Their aim is to limit the amount of outside information that their victim is receiving. They’ll talk badly about the victim’s friends and family, reduce access to social events, and may even control what the victim can read or watch on TV. Criticism This will be aimed at everyone except the manipulator. They want to create an image of themselves as superior and dominant. It’s an “us vs. them” mentality. Social proof and peer pressure This is usually done in group settings and could be used to brainwash newcomers. It works using the notion, “If so- and-so does it, it must be right.” It’s particularly effective on people who’re already quite vulnerable, unconfident, or without a clear sense of identity. Fear of alienation None of us want to feel alone or isolated from the rest of society. This technique works when groups welcome newcomers with open arms, establishing quick and profound relationships with them. Even when the newcomer starts to have doubts, they won’t vocalize or act on them for fear of being rejected by the group. Repetition This is the repetition of a message over and over again. Simple yet effective, especially when combined with social proof. It works (albeit for a very different purpose) like the affirmations we give ourselves every day. Fatigue When you’re mentally and physically tired, you’re less alert and more likely to give in to attempts at persuasion. Create a new identity This is the manipulator’s end goal. They want to strip you of your past life and your sense of self and identity. Essentially, they want to mold you into who they think you should be. Reverse Psychology *** Now let’s take a look at another example of mind control that I’m sure we’ve all used at one point or another in our lives. It’s commonly used by parents to get their kids to do something. The key is to not be too obvious while you’re doing it. And importantly, you need to take an honest look at yourself and ask why you’re doing it. It’s, after all, a form of manipulation. Certainly not like what we’ve just read, but it’s about influencing other people to get what you want. So, be mindful of your motives. Reverse psychology doesn’t work on everyone, and that’s because we can be divided up into two types of people: compliant or resistant. As you can guess, resistant people are the ones that reverse psychology struggles with. They’re less likely to follow direction, they’ll question things, they may be jaded or cynical, and perhaps quite dogmatic in their thinking. So, you may need to try harder (or give up) when you realize you’re dealing with someone resistant. And remember: this technique should not at any point involve you trying to take away someone’s free-will from them. That’s Dark Psychology stuff that you really don’t want to be getting involved with. Now that you’ve looked at your motives (and found them to be honorable), and you’ve determined whether or not 30/83 you’re likely to have any success, here are four steps to using reverse psychology. 1. Use “cloaking.” This means disguising what you’re trying to do. Make it seem like you don’t really care about the outcome. 2. Reframe the situation This is to get someone who was previously resistant to doing something to do it now. You’re trying to get them motivated by changing the way they look at the situation. 3. Introduce a third party Casually mention that another person thinks that the task can’t be done either. This ups the challenge and motivates the person to do it themselves to prove the other person wrong. 4. Give push back When the other person seems to be giving in, be slightly argumentative. This will reinforce in their mind that they should do it and that it was their own idea all along! *** The ability of our thoughts to influence our reality is incredible. Their power is best summed up thus, “As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he.” (Proverbs 23: 7). In the end, our thoughts confirm our actions. It’s inevitable. No one goes out and cheats on their spouse if those thoughts aren’t already somewhere in their mind. No one commits a serious crime on a whim. There’s first an inspiration before any action. This is to our advantage. If we learn to focus our thoughts on success, productivity, goals, happiness, etc., we’re more likely to achieve them. Our character, and ultimately our destiny, comes down to how we learn to focus our thoughts. Good ideas will eventually lead to good things. Unhealthy thoughts will lead to bad things. Sow the seeds of positive thinking now, and you can reap the harvest of success later. Action steps: 1. Check your thoughts: Wherever you are, be mindful of what you’re thinking. It takes effort to focus on particular thoughts that’ll help us to achieve our goals. Sometimes it’s so much easier to just zone out. The temptation to go on Facebook or watch TV is always there because it takes minimal effort. However, make the difference in your thinking if you have goals, or people you want to help, a hobby you want to take up, or if you want to learn more about yourself. 2. Use your thoughts to find three areas in your life where you want to improve. Write them down so that they become goals instead of desires. 3. Check on your progress each day: look back at your list and see what you’re doing to achieve your goals and what you could do better. 4. If you need help, find someone you trust, or a group of like-minded individuals, to support you towards your goal. 5. Keep your thoughts positive, and you’ll strengthen them by keeping them in your mind. Soon you’ll find that this mindfulness and positivity will affect your actions, habits, and your journey. Remember to control your thoughts; they’re what determine your destination. 31/83 ROLE OF NEUROSCIENCE IN THE REDUCTION OF ANXIETY Anxiety disorders are quite widespread in today’s fast-paced, hectic society, where everyone has access to information all the time, whether positive or negative. Anxiety is an umbrella term, meaning it covers many different psychiatric conditions. For a layperson, an anxiety disorder can be interpreted as panic and fear that randomly hits a patient when they find themselves in stressful situations. Anxiety is defined as a diffuse, vague, very unpleasant, and uncomfortable feeling a patient feels under certain circumstances. These situations can be real or a product of the patient’s imagination. There are different types of anxiety disorders, such as: 1. Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 2. Anxiety Disorder 3. Social anxiety disorder (SAD) 4. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) 5. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) The most common treatment for anxiety disorder is the use of tranquilizers. However, this solution is problematic. One reason for this is that its use isn’t recommended for long-term use, and it doesn’t get to the root cause of what’s causing the sufferer’s anxiety. Tranquilizers result in excessive sleep, clinomania (an extreme desire to stay in bed), and numb the patient’s mind and emotions. Since tranquilizers are so successful in reducing anxiety, they’re also often misused. Not to forget, they also have a lot of intense withdrawal symptoms, such as sweating, trembling hands, fast heartbeat, insomnia, and so on, that start within 24 hours of taking the last dose. The patient’s body and mind get used to it, and if they stop, they can’t live a comfortable life. Sedatives become an addiction. For these reasons, psychologists and psychiatrists should turn to neuroscience to treat or reduce anxiety disorders. Neuroscience is essentially the study of how the functions of the nervous system develop. Neuroscientists focus on a wide range of topics, from neurotransmitter specialization to specific behaviors and many different psychiatric disorders. Anxiety disorder is one of the mental illnesses, and many studies have been done by correlating a patient’s anxiety with how their nervous system responds. Therefore, these scientists and researchers have found several ways to treat and reduce stress by focusing more on the nerves. In technical terms, patients with an anxiety disorder are known to have a hyperactive amygdala, which is primarily known as the anxiety center. They sometimes even have a slightly larger amygdala. It was created to cope with more anxiety and fear, be it a generalized anxiety disorder or a social anxiety disorder, or even irrational phobias, as mentioned earlier. However, neuroscience and the study of our brain, spinal cord, and nervous system suggest that you can alter these emotions and feel healthy by controlling your fears and worries. The fantastic thing about the human brain, the nervous system’s central organ, is that it’s made to continually rewire itself to learn, grow, and heal after experiencing trauma. This is known as neuroplasticity, the brain’s ability to reorganize itself throughout its life by forming new neural connections. Because of this trait, people are continually changing as they age. Scientists believe that after a certain age, especially during childhood, the brain locks itself in a particular state. But as times go on, we can better study the brain using the non-invasive imaging technologies we’ve invented, such as the fMRI and PET scan. We can see how our brain changes itself, depending on how we use it. Neuroscientists study these changes and what their applications are. This neuroplasticity feature can help people with anxiety disorders become less anxious and control their anxiety by rewiring their brains. Neuroscience states that forcing yourself to change the way you think can change your brain’s structure, along with the different types of chemicals it pumps out. To use this distinguishing feature of the mind to fight anxiety, we must first understand the three principles of fear. 1. The first principle we need to understand is our perspective on fear. Most of us assume that fear is bad. Anxiety may be uncomfortable, but it’s not always bad. Some fear is healthy and essential to everyday life because it has a function: to motivate us to avoid real danger. Anxiety is experienced in several ways. There’s normal adaptive anxiety, which helps you function daily, be wary of what’s wrong and what’s right; your gut feeling enables you to understand when something is “off.” Then there’s the fear you feel from the pressure of your hectic routine or the stress of everyday life. 32/83 2. The second principle is to understand the disordered type of fear. It’s the fear required by the work of neuroscience because it interferes with a person’s daily functioning, it assumes that simple things are a real danger, and it obscures any judgment. It makes it difficult for us to go to work or school or to perform simple tasks. It prevents us from enjoying the little life we ​have. Contrary to popular belief, anxiety isn’t just a disorder if it’s severe. It’s disordered when: a. You feel like you’re in danger, even though you may be perfectly safe; or b. When your fear disturbs your ability to function when it takes over your life. 3. The third principle we need to understand is that avoiding what causes our fear allows our fear to torment and grow. However, you can choose to avoid it, be it by distracting yourself with social media, by drinking, by blaming others, by always staying in bed, etc. All these “coping mechanisms” only increase the fear you feel and shrink your world. This increase in anxiety levels is due to the “anxiety cycle.” The anxiety cycle is a vicious trap. Essentially, when you’re afraid of something, your brain triggers physical symptoms to help you get out of that situation. It’s the feeling of fear. When you escape the case in the short term, it gives a lot of relief. But in the long run, because you’ve got that little relief from escaping it, your brain will increase the physical symptoms and worries next time, making you extra aware, forcing you to avoid the situation altogether. Over time, this feeling gets worse, like a cycle, as your brain rewires itself to prevent that situation more and more. You miss out on life because you don’t go out, meet new people, or enter into relationships. If we agree that our cause of the fear is generally a safe situation, we can then assume that embracing our feelings and fear without running away won’t kill us. To prevent our anxiety from getting out of hand, we can intervene and force ourselves with our actions or thoughts. With our actions, we force ourselves to remain in the situation that worries us, and since no harm will come to us, our brain thinks it’s okay and will stay in such a case and not avoid it. It’ll also help us strengthen our emotional muscles, which means we can feel emotions and sensations that can make us uncomfortable without continually escaping from them, thus making us feel better. This force establishes new neural pathways in your brain, making you less and less anxious over time. If actions become too challenging to perform, you can also interfere with your thoughts, which means thinking about the harmless situation that makes you anxious and telling yourself not to worry about anything. However, as with all ideas, it can get very complicated. It’s always better to consider a situation as harmless before entering into it, rather than during or after. Therefore, it’s still better to use your actions to combat anxiety. But if that gets too hard to enforce, you can take the following steps to make it easier on yourself. 1. Create an exposure hierarchy: Break down everything that scares you into several steps and boldly start facing the one you can most easily follow. It’s important to take baby steps because if you jump in too quickly, you’ll panic, the anxiety will further increase, and your anxiety level will rise. 2. Change Your Rules: People assume that courage is the absence of fear when, in fact, it just realizes that some things are more important than avoiding what scares you. It’s the will to let yourself do something, even if it can make you uncomfortable or scared. We must make sure that we don’t allow ourselves to determine how we do things. For this, we must remain with our fear for a specific time, at least until it subsides. 3. Face Your Fears: This has been said before. However, it’s essential to just do things sometimes, no matter how afraid we are of them. It’s okay to feel anxious as long as you don’t let it control you. It’s all about willingness and acceptance. By following these steps, you rewire your brain and new nerves, causing your anxiety disorder to decrease over time as your brain develops and realizes that something we develop as the cause of your irrational fear is nothing to worry about. People with anxiety tend to actively resist relaxation, despite how good it’s for a person’s body and soul, and choose to worry. So, they should force themselves to relax and worry less about something harmless. Understandably, this is a straightforward way to use neuroscience studies to treat such conditions. However, it’s much more challenging to implement them. Therefore, neuroscience suggests that there are also some songs and sounds you can listen to to reduce your anxiety disorder. Indigenous cultures use music to improve their well-being, mental stability, and even their health. Most retreats and spas play “sounds of nature” to make their clients more relaxed and reduce their anxiety levels. 33/83 One study was developed to find out whether or not music is something that helps reduce anxiety or not. Participants were told to solve complicated puzzles while listening to different songs. The participants had sensors connected to them to measure their brain activity and their physiological symptoms, such as heart rate, blood pressure, and even breathing, to conclude how anxiety levels are affected by music. Of all the songs they heard, Marconi Union’s “Weightless” was found to reduce participants’ anxiety levels by 65%. Funnily enough, this had been the aim when the song had been made. When this song was composed, Marconi Union worked with many sound therapists to carefully arrange all rhythms, harmonies, and bass levels to help slow and reduce the heart rate and blood pressure of those who listen to the song. Likewise, “Electra” by Airstream and “Watermark” by Enya do a similar job. In short, it’s will and determination that’ll help you overcome what makes you anxious and help you to conquer your anxiety. 34/83 CHAPTER 7 Using Neuroscience in Mood Disorders, Aggression, and Anxiety Mood Disorder Treatment: Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy and How It Works P sychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice published an article in January 2015 claiming that that bipolar disorder’s mood swings are influenced by thoughts. In other words, overly negative thoughts could lead to “descent behaviors” (such as withdrawing from friends, leading to depression). In contrast, excessively positive thoughts could lead to “ascent behaviors” (such as risk-taking, associated with mania). Therefore, the highs and lows of the mood disorder are directly linked to the patient’s thoughts. In light of this, we can see how Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) could be used to balance out the extreme mood swings associated with bipolar and other mood disorders. CBT works on the whole premise that our thoughts, actions, and emotions are interlinked and work together (or against each other). It makes sense that a therapy that aims to take our problematic thought and behavioral patterns and change them would be an essential part of treatment for these types of disorders. An example of a negative thought pattern: your boss emails you, asking to meet you later that day to discuss your latest work project. You immediately suspect the worst; you imagine that he’s unhappy with your work, that he thinks you’re a terrible employee, and that he wants to fire you. You spend the rest of the day miserable and anticipating the worst. CBT instructs you to respond to circumstances with calmer thoughts to keep your state of mind more stable. For example, your boss just wants to ask a few questions about your job. Individuals regularly feel better and achieve more personal satisfaction after experiencing CBT. In one study into CBT and its use in treating mood disorders, researchers looked at two different groups of recently- diagnosed patients. One group received standard treatment, including medication and community support, a psychiatrist, or a regular doctor. The other group received standard treatment and CBT. The results? The latter group benefited from more effective, longer-lasting effects than the group that didn’t receive CBT. CBT teaches patients vital skills that directly target how their disorder affects them, and we’ll take a look at some of these now. Six CBT techniques for mood disorders 1. Acknowledging your condition: The first step is to understand and accept that you’ve got a disorder and its effects. It’s often difficult for people with a mood disorder to acknowledge it, so it’s fundamental to show them the signs, side effects, causes, and course. It helps individuals find support while knowing that they’re not alone. 2. Checking your mood: This is done using a worksheet or journal, done daily between appointments, and then checked by your therapist. Individuals are asked to assess their moods on a scale of 0 to 10 every day, with 0 meaning “depressed,” 5 meaning “feeling okay,” and 10 being meaning “highly irritable or elevated mood.” The idea is to gradually become aware of your mood, its causes, and how it changes. 3. Cognitive restructuring: This procedure is all about improving unhelpful thought patterns by figuring out how to be more alert to how your thoughts affect your moods, how to recognize problematic thoughts, and how to change or correct them. The therapist shows the patient how to examine their thoughts by looking out for distortion and creating progressively balanced thinking. 4. Solve the problem: This progress includes figuring out how to distinguish a problem, produce possible solutions, select a solution, try it, and assess the outcome. Usually instructed in treatment first, problem-solving is then practiced between sessions. Problems can occur in any area of ​life, from relationship problems to unemployment to credit card debt. These stressors, if not resolved, can put you at a higher risk of spiraling moods. 5. Improve your social skills: A few people with mood disorders lack specific social skills, making them feel that they’re not in charge of a particular part of their life. Learning skills, such as assertiveness, can help you better deal with interpersonal relationships. 6. Daily routine: By participating in regular, routine activities sets a good structure for your day. Structure and 35/83 predictability stabilize mood. This could mean establishing a set time for exercising, doing chores, getting proper sleep, eating at regular hours, and making time to socialize. How to maximize the effects of mood disorder treatment ● Listen to your doctor. Accept your diagnosis and the treatment that’s been prescribed for you. ● Do your CBT homework. This means to do what’s asked of your therapist in between sessions. Your skills will be built through practice. ● Continuous learning. Read self-help guides, join a support group, and ask your doctor or therapist questions to better understand your disorder. Remember your aim: keep your moods stabilized and be an active part of your own treatment. Interpersonal Therapy (IPT) and Mood Disorders ITP is similar to CBT in that it’s an empirically validated and time-limited form of psychotherapy designed to help treat mood disorders, such as depression. However, it differs from CBT as it’s not a behavioral therapy; it focuses on interpersonal relationships and how these affect the patient’s condition and symptoms. The aim is to shift the blame patients often feel onto the illness and, to some extent, onto their interpersonal circumstances. There are three phases to IPT. First phase: formulation The therapist diagnoses their client and determines the interpersonal context within which the depression arose. These could include the death of a loved one, divorce, becoming a parent, moving house, conflict at work, avoidance of social situations. They’re divided into four interpersonal areas: - Grief - Role transition - Interpersonal disputes - Interpersonal deficits The therapist’s conclusions are called the “interpersonal formulation.” Together with the client, they agree on the causes of the symptoms and what the treatment will consist of. The therapist emphasizes that the patient’s symptoms are part of a disease and not a personal shortcoming. Middle phase This stage marks the beginning of the patient’s acceptance of the interpersonal formulation. Here, the focus is on no more than two of the four interpersonal problem areas. These problem areas have a specific set of ways to overcome them. - Grief: catharsis and establishing new activities to fill the void caused by the loss. - Role transition: mourning loss of the old role and focusing on the new one’s positive aspects. - Interpersonal conflict: the resolution of the problem, and if a solution isn’t possible, ending that relationship and mourning as appropriate. - Interpersonal deficit: teaching new social skills to help build new relationships. Each session starts with the client being asked by their therapist, “How have things been since we last met?” This gives both the opportunity to see if there’s been progress and if not, they’ll explore the difficulties still being faced by the patient. Final phase: “graduation.” This occurs during the last few therapy sessions and aims to reinforce the client’s sense of capability and independence. The client’s response to treatment is evaluated, and if there are still areas to work on, these will be discussed. The patient is reassured that they haven’t failed; it’s the therapy that hasn’t worked in this instance. Continued treatment in a new treatment contract may be offered since depression can recur. IPT is seen as most effective in patients who are involved in current conflict or are trying to adjust to stressful life changes. Like CBT, it requires full commitment from the patient as the practice of the skills they learn in sessions is vital to see progress or long-term effects. Brain Stimulation Therapy Brain stimulation therapy is used as part of the treatment of certain mental disorders. It works by activating or inhibiting the brain through electricity. These therapy types are less commonly used but have shown promise in dealing with certain disorders that don’t respond to other treatment types. Several stimulation therapies are used: Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) This is used to treat severe depression or depression with psychosis that hasn’t responded to medication. 36/83 Before undergoing ECT, the patient is placed under general sedation and given a muscle relaxant. Electrodes are placed on specific areas on the scalp. An electric current passes through the cerebrum to trigger a deliberate seizure. ECT treatments are usually given three times a week for up to twelve sessions. Short-term side effects can include short-term memory loss, but these are minimal. Follow-up maintenance treatments and medication is usually required. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS ) This non-invasive treatment uses a magnetic coil to apply short electromagnetic pulses to specific nerve cells in the cerebrum. The magnet is placed against the temple, while pulses are sent through the skull. The method is used to treat severe depression in patients who don’t respond to at least one medication type. Anger Management Psychotherapy and counseling can support you, or others in your life, in dealing with an anger problem. Before looking for the appropriate type of therapy that’ll work best for you, there are a few things to consider first. First of all, understand that anger is a typical human emotion. Now and then, it’s appropriate to feel some kind of rage. However, when this emotion is misdirected, uncontrolled, or associated with dysfunctional behavior, it becomes an issue that can affect your everyday life and that of others around you. Second, note that the way you deal with and display anger are “skills” that have been created, repeated, and enhanced over your lifetime. Fortunately, however, these skills can be changed. Many anger problems result from an automatic, emotional response, and with training, this response can be changed. Therefore, it’s imperative to approach qualified therapists so they can uncover the root causes of your anger and teach you how to manage and respond to them. Third, if you’re concerned about confidentiality, discuss these issues with your therapist. Generally, your sessions will remain strictly confidential unless you specifically threaten to harm another person. A specialist can take a wide variety of approaches to help an individual tackle their anger management issues. Some people can benefit from exploring childhood trauma, while others may be helped with medication. CBT can be particularly useful in the treatment of anger. CBT for the treatment of anger CBT strategies focus on recognizing the triggers for angry thoughts and behavior and replacing them with more practical perspectives, techniques, and strategies for coping with your anger. Your therapist will start by asking questions, using exercises to uncover these triggers, and working with you over the sessions to develop and engage in new, productive techniques for confidently managing your anger. A word on forgiveness and anger Every day we’re faced with countless things that others do that get on our nerves. Our kids are sometimes messy at home, arguing with each other, pouting, throwing tantrums, and trying to push boundaries. At work, we often have to work with colleagues with whom we don’t see eye to eye or with bosses who take our skills and hard work for granted and refuse to pay us a raise. But believing that others have deliberately set out to cause problems for us is quite often off-base. When we feel that they “should have” acted a certain way or that they “could have” behaved differently, we’re placing our expectations onto them and ignoring the real reasons behind their actions. Perhaps your kids are just tired, or your boss himself is under pressure and dealing with his own problems right now. This way of thinking is damaging-the sense of people being “out to get you,” or the hurt and disappointment you feel from unmet expectations-and it can lead to genuine anger issues if not dealt with. Trying to recognize and understand the root causes of others’ actions and behavior, and forgiving them, will go a long way in helping to deal with your own issues regarding anger and bitterness. It’ll improve your relationships with those around you and help you gain a new perspective on life. Treatment of anxiety disorders with psychotherapy Whether you’re experiencing panic attacks, obsessive thoughts, relentless stress, or debilitating fear associated with anxiety, realize that you don’t have to just put up with it. Treatment can help, and psychotherapy is often the best alternative. That’s because this form of therapy, rather than only the use of medication, delves deep to find the root cause of the issues causing your anxiety. Therapy can help reveal the primary reasons for your stress and anxiety; teach you how to relax; help you look at circumstances in new, positive ways; and develop better adaptability and critical thinking. The treatment gives you the tools to beat stress and anxiety and shows you how to use them practically. 37/83 The types of anxiety disorders vary considerably, so treatment should be tailored for your specific symptoms and circumstance. For example, if you have obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), your treatment won’t be the same as someone who needs help with panic attacks. The treatment duration also depends on the type and severity of your anxiety problem. There are numerous different types of anxiety treatments available. As indicated by the American Psychological Association, many individuals can find their condition improves within 8 to 10 therapy sessions. Although a wide variety of treatments are used to treat anxiety, the primary methodologies are CBT and exposure therapy. Each anxiety treatment can be used alone or combined with different types of treatment. Anxiety treatment can be one-on-one or can take place in a group setting. Be that as it may, the goal is always the same: to lower levels of stress and anxiety, to calm your brain, and overcome your fears. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety Research has shown that CBT can produce exceptional results in patients suffering from anxiety disorder, social anxiety, panic attacks, and other conditions that include anxiety symptoms. CBT focuses on changing negative thought patterns (how we view the world and ourselves) and behaviors. It includes: ● Analysis of how negative thoughts or understanding contribute to anxiety. ● Looks at how you act and respond in conditions that cause stress and anxiety. The central premise behind CBT is that our thoughts, not external events, influence how we feel. It’s not the circumstance you’re in that determines how you think, but your impression of it. For example, imagine that you’ve been welcomed at an important meeting. Think about three different perspectives regarding the greeting and how they’d affect your feelings in different ways. This demonstrates how one occasion can evoke different feelings in different people. Everything depends on our desires, mentality, and beliefs. For people suffering from anxiety, negative perspectives feed the negative emotions of fear and anxiety. The purpose of this psychological, social treatment of anxiety is to recognize and address these negative thoughts and beliefs. The idea is that if you change how you think, then you’ll change how you feel. Cognitive restructuring in CBT Cognitive restructuring, or cognitive reframing, is a procedure in which you discover and challenge the negative, irrational thoughts (cognitive distortions) that fuel your fear and replace them with increasingly positive, practical ones. It includes three stages: - Identifying and recognizing negative thoughts. In anxiety sufferers, certain circumstances are considered more dangerous than they actually are, such as shaking someone’s hand. - Challenging negative thoughts. The therapist will show the patient how to assess their perceptions. It involves questioning practicality, analyzing positive beliefs, and testing reality until the patient believes that their negative thoughts aren’t grounded in reality. - Replacing negative thoughts with more realistic and positive ones. The therapist can help the patient with rational, calming statements that the patient will say to themselves when faced with or anticipating situations that’d likely raise their anxiety levels. than Replacing negative expected. Negative factors are often a deep-rooted part of someone’s thinking. It takes practice to change thought patterns, and the patient must be prepared to continually challenge their thought process and use their new-found skills in real-life situations. thoughts with more practical, logical, and positive ones is more complicated Cognitive-behavioral therapy can also include: ● Making yourself aware of the physical sensations you experience while anxious. ● Encouraging strategies to deal with change and activities to help relieve stress and anxiety. ● Challenging fears in hypothetical scenarios and in practical application. Exposure therapy for anxiety No one wants to experience fear or anxiety, so it’s reasonable to want to avoid it whenever possible. For someone afraid of heights, this could mean adding hours onto their daily commute to avoid having to cross a bridge. For someone terrified of public speaking, it could mean not attending a friend’s wedding, so they don’t have to give a toast. Aside from the fact that it takes up a lot of time and energy and can cause great inconvenience or even damage relationships with people, staying away from your fears means that you’ll never get a chance to overcome 38/83 them. Staying away from your feelings of anxiety makes them even more deep-rooted. Exposure therapy, as the name suggests, opens you up to the circumstances or situations you’re afraid of. The idea is that through repeated exposure, you’ll feel a growing sense of authority over the events, and your anxiety will decrease. Exposure is done in one of two ways: Your therapist may ask you to imagine the stressful circumstance, or you may challenge it in person. Exposure therapy can be used separately from or within CBT. Systematic desensitization Instead of immediately confronting your greatest fear, which could do more harm than good, exposure treatment usually begins with systematic desensitization. This type of therapy allows you to steadily challenge your feelings of fear, creates security, and enables you to believe that you’re in control of your thoughts, emotions, and actions. Systematic desensitization consists of three parts: Learning deep muscle relaxation techniques and breathing exercises: When you begin to deal with your feelings of anxiety, you’ll use these relaxing methods to reduce your physical responses to tension and stress, such as shivering and hyperventilating. Creating a fear hierarchy: You rate the stimuli that create your fear, starting from the least fear to the most. For example, if you suffer from a fear of flying, you may rate looking at a photo of a plane as provoking the least anxiety and actually getting on a plane as causing the most. Working through the fear hierarchy: Under the guidance of your therapist, you’ll then start working through each stage of the scale, practicing the relaxation techniques as you go along. The goal is to stay in each scenario until your fear subsides, eventually working your way to the most fear-provoking one. Finally, you’ve re-conditioned yourself to successfully cope with your chosen anxiety-inducing fear. 39/83 CHAPTER 8 Using Neuroscience to Improve Mental Health Treatment any people experience mental illness at some point in their lives. It’s a global problem, with the World Health Organization reporting in 2001, around 450 million people suffering from some form of mental disorder or brain condition. M The treatment available for those suffering from mental illness isn’t standard worldwide, especially countries fighting the challenges of poverty, stigma, and lack of mental health trained clinicians. It’s essential to find universally- acknowledged treatments to tackle this overwhelming, global problem. It’s said that where there’s a problem, there’s a solution, and neuroscience could be the key. Neuroscience studies the structure and function of the nervous system and the brain, and neuroscientists tend to focus on the brain and its impact on behavior and cognitive functions. Neuroscience can cure a person’s mental illness by opening or revealing the mental disorder’s molecular factors. By adequately studying the disease’s cause and effect, you can find the solution to a problem. Therefore, neuroscience is essential to our understanding of mental illness and allows us to focus on research and treatment. Some people more resilient personalities than others. They may be able to overcome particular challenges or experiences that other, less resilient people could. In such cases, these less resilient people are more likely to succumb to mental disorders. So, if we use neuroscience to examine resilience’s neurobiology, we could find solutions to tackle certain mental disorders. Translational neuroscience offers new ways of looking at and focusing on conditions such as schizophrenia. Schizophrenia can cause cognitive problems to memory and motor skills, causing the sufferer to endure a low quality of life. Previously, only psychiatric symptoms were the main focus. With a cognitive-based approach, new treatments can be explored. Like other diseases, the early detection and treatment of mental disorders are vital. Deterioration in mental health is directly associated with a decline in quality of life, well-being, and day-to-day functioning. Incorporating neuroscience predictors, such as findings in genetics and endpoints, can further developments in treatment. Thus, combining neuroscience findings and incorporating therapies such as CBT and certain medications could be an effective path towards treating mental disorders. Pharmacological treatment For long-term medications, such as antidepressants, anti-anxiety medications, mood-stabilizing drugs, and antipsychotics have been used to treat mental disorders. However, there’s little guarantee that medication alone is sufficient enough in itself to cure mental illness. Additionally, many drugs bring with them adverse side effects. For example, in treating disorders such as schizophrenia, using the antipsychotic medication can often result in side effects that can leave the patient with poor functioning. The discovery of new drugs with little-to-no side-effects is a considerable challenge. People who’ve been diagnosed with a mental illness tend to get better and relieve their symptoms by following a treatment plan tailored to their own specific needs and situation. The most common treatment used to cure mental illness is through a combination of psychotherapy and medication. Most scientists believe that mental illnesses result from problems in neurotransmission. The central nervous system comprises the brain and spinal cord, and it controls our actions, thoughts, and emotions. This is controlled by chemicals called neurotransmitters, which travel between different parts of the brain by nerve cells called neurons. Medication used in treating various mental illnesses, including depression and anxiety, aims to “work” on these neurotransmitters to help stabilize or improve mood. A psychiatrist or other health professional will often recommend mood stabilizers, antipsychotics, antidepressants, and atypical antipsychotics, depending on the patient’s particular symptoms. Mental illness shouldn’t be ignored. If you need help or advice, please make an appointment to see a health practitioner, sooner rather than later. 40/83 WHAT ARE THE FACTORS THAT AFFECT NEUROGENESIS IN OUR BRAIN? Neurogenesis, put simply, is the birth of new neurons. Scientists’ discovery in humans took place only recently, in 1998, and is still being thoroughly researched. However, what’s clear is its incredible importance in debunking the myth that neurons only develop in childhood; we can generate new cells in adulthood. Several behavioral, economic, pharmacological, and biochemical factors influence this process, many of which we control. Neurogenesis associates changes in neuroplasticity to changes in the synapses of the brain and neural pathways. Neurogenesis occurs in the subventricular zone and in the hippocampus’ subgranular region of the brain. Some of the hippocampus’s main functions relate to memory, learning, spatial orientation, and emotional regulation. It also plays a critical role in learning and memory, and several cognitive pathologies such as anxiety, addiction, depression, and neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s are related to changes. The development of new neurons depends on various factors that modulate each of the neurogenesis steps. In very young people, it naturally occurs at a very high rate. Factors influencing neurogenesis Several factors that influence the development and survival of new neurons have been identified. The primary way to keep producing new cells is through engaging in activities that stimulate the brain. This could include learning a new skill or engaging in new activities that keep your mind alert. Inactivity, it seems damages neurons. Other factors include: Substantial alcohol intake over a reasonably long period can adversely affect neurogenesis. However, although neurogenesis is disrupted during alcohol addiction, it does recover. Within four to five weeks after abstinence, a marked increase in the development of new neurons in the hippocampus can be observed. Most addictive medications, such as nicotine, morphine, and cocaine, inhibit neurogenesis. A new study indicates that cannabinoids also stimulate neurogenesis. The study included a synthetic cannabinoid that enhanced progenitor proliferation in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of mice, as did certain antidepressants. The cannabinoid has also had substantial effects as an antidepressant. Further work is required to validate this early finding. If antidepressants stimulate neurogenesis, it won’t be surprising to discover that chronic stress, anxiety, and depression are associated with the loss of hippocampal neurons. A study in rats also found that tension in the hippocampus permanently disrupts neurogenesis in early life. An intriguing rat study showing the other side of this photo showed that rankings affected hippocampal neurogenesis. High-level animals have about 30% more neurons in their hippocampus after being placed in a naturalistic environment with other rats. Regular social contact may also have an effect. Research on the brains of songbirds also showed that birds that live in large groups had more new neurons and therefore had a higher memory than birds that lived alone. All types of exercise and environmental enrichment (“mental stimulation”) are seen as helpful neurogenesis factors. And finally, rodent experiments show that a calorie-restricted diet can also be helpful. Calorie restriction was associated with increased BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor-a protein related to nerve growth) and improved memory capacity. The brain responded to this stress through increased neurogenesis. Several other lifestyle factors influence neurogenesis. Sleep deprivation reduces the neurogenesis of the hippocampus. The brain can repair deficits with a transient increase in neurogenesis after short-term sleep deprivation. Recent literature shows that sleep plays a critical role in brain detoxification, and prolonged sleep deprivation is severely detrimental to brain function. Sun exposure is known for its role in increasing vitamin D, but it also increases serotonin and BDNF in the brain. Sunlight exposure is good practice; even light exposure of about ten minutes can positively affect brain health. Sexual activity, while promoting neurogenesis, is beneficial for brain development and increases levels of good neurotransmitter sound. Nutrition and neurogenesis Diet or nutrition plays an essential role in neurogenesis and brain development. Excess refined sugar harms the brain, and it’s necessary to avoid processed and processed foods whenever possible. The mind is 60% fat, and the right fats are needed for proper brain function. There should be a wide variety of vegetable and animal fats included in your diet. Omega-3 fatty acids appear essential for neurogenesis, with rich sources such as fatty fish and some vegetable oils. This fatty acid is the major structural part of the brain and several other parts of the body. Certain foods like blueberries and green tea can also help promote brain health and promote neurogenesis. Many ingredients, such as the spice turmeric, have more direct effects on the process. Curcumin is the primary active 41/83 ingredient in spices. BDNF levels have been found to rise when acting as an antidepressant, but without the side effects seen with SSRIs. Exercise and neurogenesis Cardiovascular exercises, such as running, strength training, cross-fit, and even yoga, are the most successful ways to improve neurogenesis; they’ve a wide variety of health benefits for the body and mind. They’re also crucial for stress relief. Exercise increases hormones such as testosterone, which also have a beneficial effect on neurogenesis and serve as a buffer from the impact of psychological stress. Mediation and neurogenesis There’s an increasing body of scientific evidence to support the benefits of meditation. It’s shown to cause an increase in gray matter density in several brain areas, including the hippocampus. The approach is technically simple but can be a challenge to practice. You sit comfortably with your back upright. Eyes are closed or partially closed. Take a few deep breaths while experiencing the different sensations in your body. Be aware of your breathing, and let the focus rest on each inhale and exhale. When your mind wanders, bring it back to your breathing consciousness. You may encounter sensory phenomena; you can notice it, but don’t deal with them. Turn your attention back to breathing; if your thoughts go astray, go back to the breath. Persist with this when you start, doing a session of about ten to fifteen minutes. Done at night, meditation can also increase melatonin levels, which has several beneficial effects, including promoting neurogenesis. Yoga can also support brain function, with hippocampal volume increasing in older yoga practitioners. Psychoactive substances and neurogenesis Most psychoactive substances appear to harm neurogenesis, with some notable exceptions. One of the leading and most common causes of reduced hippocampal neurogenesis may be due to chronic alcohol consumption. Alcohol intake also increases cortisol levels, with a different domino effect. Psilocybin and neurogenesis It’s recently been found that psilocybin-a naturally occurring psychedelic prodrug compound found in more than 200 species of fungi-improves the hippocampal neurocampus in mice and improves their “unlearning” rate of negative behavioral anxiety responses to drug-free regulation. It may indicate that psilocybin may have PTSD-treatment potential for humans, a condition characterized by highly irregular brain activity, including decreased hippocampal activity. Findings with high doses of psilocybin have shown that they can cause long-term optimistic personality changes, joie de vivre, and an overall sense of well-being. Openness is one of the “Big Five” personality dimensions and is dramatically changed by psilocybin in the long run, especially when people have a spiritual experience during a session. This personality adjustment remained high for 14 months after the session and seemed like a long-term adjustment. Openness includes personality traits such as the desire for new experiences, immense creativity, and finding meaning in aesthetics, emotion, and curiosity, with a hunger for information. These improvements lead to increased neurogenesis and neuroplasticity. Thus, psilocybin can function as a versatile brain tonic, which can have a range of therapeutic applications, but remains highly illegal and known to have “no medicinal use and a high potential for violence” worldwide. Ketamine and neurogenesis Ketamine has been shown to significantly increase BDNF production in the hippocampus in rats. It can stimulate the development of new synapses and reverse synaptic defects associated with chronic stress and enhance neuroplasticity. Constant ketamine use is associated with bladder damage and potential neurotoxicity, but it may form the basis for a new set of safer and more potent antidepressants. SSRI antidepressants and neurogenesis SSRI antidepressants have been shown to improve hippocampal neurogenesis, which can play a critical role in their antidepressant effect. Nevertheless, these antidepressants are only beneficial for a certain percentage of the population. They’ve different side effects. After stopping use, there can be painful and long-term withdrawal symptoms. If the increase in neurogenesis is part of the effects of these antidepressants, there are certainly safer and more natural ways to improve this cycle. New antidepressants for their neurogenic potential may be tested in the future. 42/83 Noopept and neurogenesis Supplements such as noopept may help treat some types of brain injuries and associated learning and memory impairments. Long-term noopept therapy may result in the down-regulation of TrkB receptors associated with neurotrophins neuronal survival and brain differentiation. Therefore, Noopept is best used cyclically, giving the brain time to find a balance between usage. The is worrying. the compound offers no value to otherwise healthy brains that fact Ibogaine and neurogenesis Ibogaine is a primary alkaloid responsible for the psychoactivity of the Tabernanthe iboga root bark. It’s used in Central Africa for spiritual and healing purposes. It’s been found that an autoregulatory positive feedback loop raises the level of GDNF in the long term. Also, the increase in GDNF expression signals neurons to increase mRNA levels to further support GDNF development. A single dose of ibogaine can increase GDNF expression for weeks, depending on the treatment. Ibogaine is also extremely lipophilic; it loves fat and stays in body tissue for months, slowly being released, further enhancing its effect on GDNF expression. increase in GDNF expression This facts of ibogaine addiction. GDNF infusion has been used to diagnose Parkinson’s disease, but it’s an invasive procedure. In treating Parkinson’s disease and cognitive pathologies such as addiction, potential compounds may serve as pharmacological vectors to enhance GDNF expression in the brain. for some of the known responsible interrupting is usually Ayahuasca and neurogenesis Plants such as the ayahuasca vine (Banisteriopsis caapi) and the Syrian rue (Peganum Harmala) are harmine sources. Both have a long history of human use as medicinal products. The harmine acts as an inhibitor of reversible monoamine oxidase to raise monoamine levels with antidepressant effects in humans. Acute administration has been shown to increase BDNF levels and produce antidepressant-like results in the hippocampus of rats, which may be a potential pharmacological target for the treatment of depression. Ayahuasca use has been shown to contribute to a long-term increase in 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) platelet transporters. Recent neuroimaging research has demonstrated long-term improvements in users’ brain structure with associated beneficial effects, indicating advances in neuroplasticity. DMT is closely associated with neurotrophic psilocybin. It’s speculated that this endogenous compound plays a role in neurogenesis, neuroprotection, brain growth, and cellular regeneration. Hemp and neurogenesis Cannabis may have a positive effect on neurogenesis. Studies in rats with a synthetic cannabinoid closely related to THC showed improved hippocampal neurogenesis, correlated with anxiety disorders and antidepressant behavior. Neurogenesis was disrupted when this mechanism was interrupted by X-rays, and the anti-anxiety activity was no longer observed, indicating a link between the two. Much cannabis has been developed for psychoactive effects) and low cannabidiol (CBD), which compete in the brain for the same receptor. The use of CBD is more common in strains that cause neurogenesis. to be high THC (responsible As a neuroprotective agent, research indicates that it can be neuroprotective against potent THC and alcohol exposure. It’s a drug of growing medical interest, but it’s also a potent antioxidant; it’s an antipsychotic that regulates THC’s effects. In terms of brain function, variants with a high CBD content may be preferred, and the healthiest and most effective approaches are to get the most out of cannabis, vaporize and drink it orally. The CBD content in cannabis can be increased in strains that contain it during harvest. CBD is one of THC breakdowns’ primary metabolites, and its processing later increases the CBD to THC ratio. Curing also increases the rates of CBD. Neurogenesis is a groundbreaking scientific frontier, and much remains unclear about the implications of this mechanism and its role in its functioning. Nevertheless, we can control this remarkable cycle, and it can help keep depression, anxiety, and neurodegenerative diseases at bay while helping us maintain healthy brain function into old age. 43/83 E CHAPTER 9 Writing as a Tool to Help Combat Fear and Anxiety veryone has random thoughts going through their head, and at times it’s as though we don’t even notice them. It’s like having a piece of music on in the background while trying to do some work. If these thoughts tend towards the negative, it can severely impact their mood and daily life. Continually living with certain ideas can make them seem “real.” People can quickly adapt to these thoughts and believe that they’re not actually a problem for them. But an individual should know that they can’t let these negative, intrusive thoughts and self-talk persist. This background music is hindering their life. Getting rid of these superfluous, useless thoughts that cause us anxiety can seem like an impossible task. However, there’s a simple way that we can start to tackle them: writing. Writing down our thoughts and feelings is recommended for people trying to control their anxiety. There have been many studies demonstrating its effectiveness. Writing can promote happiness and helps manage stress. It’s a straightforward technique that may not look like an obvious solution to most people, but writing can be beneficial in so many ways. It has very few limitations; you just need to keep at it regularly. HOW DO YOU START? There are no hard and fast rules, but it’s a good idea to start by sitting down every day for about five minutes and put your pen to paper or your fingers on the keyboard. Over time, you can increase the duration of these writing sessions. You can write about anything that’s on your mind. Write down as much detail as you can. What you’re feeling like right now, what’s happened during the day, or what happened in the past. You may find it difficult initially; it’s hard to recall unhappy incidents or connect with negative emotions. But the more you write, the more you’ll be able to come to terms with all of these thoughts and feelings. You may even be able to find out what things cause you to feel a certain way. This all helps you in confronting your anxiety and finding ways to get through it. BUILD A BETTER SPIRITUAL FRAMEWORK. Writing about what bothers or worries you can help you analyze aspects of your life holding you back. When you write in this way, it can carve a path towards a more critical, logical way of thinking. By clearing your mind of negativity, you’ll have a clearer mindset to start tackling your life. Once a person challenges themselves to face their anxiety or negative thinking, it can help boost their self-awareness and self-confidence. It helps build the resources they need to effectively problem-solve and make decisions based on logic and rational thought. Putting the energy into doing something that can help you move from a negative inner world into a positive one is ultimately empowering. It’ll affect every other aspect of your life. You’ll discover that you’re able to do better every day. The causes of some issues will require more attention than others. But if you’ve trouble talking to other people, you can always talk to your journal. A journal will always keep your secrets. It’s constantly a good listener. And it’s never judgmental. Writing can be your greatest companion in the fight against fear and anxiety. 44/83 FOODS THAT CAN HELP REDUCE ANXIETY Anxiety can be a debilitating condition for many people. It’s a condition characterized by constant worry and nervousness. It’s associated with many physical symptoms, such as profuse sweating and heart palpitations. Including certain food and nutrients in your diet can help to alleviate anxiety and reduce the severity of symptoms. This is thanks in large part to their brain-boosting properties. The following can all be incorporated into your diet to help reduce stress and anxiety. Still, it’s important to remember that further research needs to be done to confirm the effects of these foods and nutrients. 1. Fatty fish Oily fish, such as salmon, mackerel, sardines, trout, and herring, are high in polyunsaturated fatty acids. These acids have a healthy relationship with a psychological functioning. Omega-3 rich foods that contain omega-3 fatty acids (ALA) contain two essential fatty acids: omega-3 (EPA) and omega-3 (DHA). EPA and DHA regulate neurotransmitters, cut back inflammation, and promote healthy brains to operate. A small study of twenty-four individuals with abuse problems found that supplementation with EPA and DHA led to reduced hysteria. However, additional analysis is needed. Current recommendations recommend including at least two servings of fatty fish per week. A study conducted on men found salmon intake three times a week reduced self-reported anxiety. Salmon and sardines are also among the few foods that contain fat-soluble vitamins. 2. Chamomile This herb contains high amounts of antioxidants designed to reduce inflammation, reducing the risk of stress. Despite many studies showing its favorable effects, most of these have been conducted using chamomile extract and not chamomile tea, which is most commonly consumed by people. While these results are favorable, most studies are the inhibitory levels and anti-inflammatory effects. 3. Turmeric Turmeric is a spice containing curcumin, a compound that’s been studied for its role in promoting brain health and preventing anxiety disorders. Animal and test-tube studies show that curcumin can boost the omega-3 fatty acid, DHA, in the brain, by helping your body to synthesize it better. In one study, twenty mg/kg curcumin caused significant anti-anxiety effects in stressed mice compared to mice given a lower dose. Curcumin also has potent anti-inflammatory properties that have been shown to stop damage to brain cells. Also, curcumin consumption has been shown to increase blood antioxidant levels, usually low in people with anxiety. 4. Dark chocolate Dark chocolate contains flavanols-antioxidants that can help brain function. They increase blood flow to the brain, aiding its ability to adapt to stressful changes that can cause anxiety and other mood disorders. Some researchers also suggest that dark chocolate’s role in brain health is that of “comfort”; if you like the taste of something, it can lift your mood. Consuming 74% dark chocolate twice daily for two weeks has been shown to improve stress hormone levels, such as cortisol. Its consumption has also been shown to increase serotonin levels which can help reduce stress. However, dark chocolate is best consumed in moderation as it’s high in calories and easy to overeat. 1-1.5 ounces per serving is recommended. 5. Yogurt Some types of yogurt contain probiotics, or healthy bacteria, which can improve not only your mental health but other aspects of your physical health too. Studies have shown that probiotic foods could promote mental health and brain function by inhibiting free radicals and neurotoxins that damage the brain’s nerve tissue and leading to anxiety. 45/83 It’s important to realize that not all yogurt contains probiotics; opt for one which has live active cultures. It’s recommended that women consume 4.4 ounces twice daily to see the benefits. 6. Green tea Green tea contains L-theanine, an amino acid that’s shown to positively affect brain health and reduce anxiety. L-theanine can prevent nerves from becoming overexcited, and it may also increase anti-anxiety neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin. Green tea also contains antioxidants (such as EGCG), which can help aid brain health. Drinking several cups of this tea can reduce psychological distress. Other foods can help with anxiety but haven’t undergone definitive studies in terms of their specific benefits. Their nutrients, however, are believed to improve related symptoms. Turkey, bananas, and oats These contain amino acid tryptophan, which is converted to serotonin in the body, boosting relaxation and reducing stress. Eggs, meat, and dairy products These foods provide high-quality protein that produces the neurotransmitters serotonin and dopamine, which help promote mental health. Chia Seeds These contain brain-boosting omega-3 fatty acids, which have been shown to help with reducing anxiety. Citrus fruits and bell peppers These are rich in vitamin C and have antioxidant properties, which fight inflammation and help prevent nerve cell damage. Almonds These nuts contain a large amount of vitamin E that’s been studied for its role in preventing anxiety. Blueberries Blueberries are high in vitamin C and antioxidants, such as flavonoids, which are being studied to improve brain health and alleviate anxiety. SUMMARY Some foods contain specific nutrients that promote brain health and prevent anxiety or reduce your symptoms’ severity. In general, more studies need to be done into their particular roles and their effects on brain health. Most studies are conducted laboratories, and additional high-quality human studies are needed. However, it’s safe to say that many foods and beverages will help alleviate your anxiety symptoms as they reduce inflammation and improve your brain health. in animals or 46/83 D CHAPTER 10 Positives of Dark Psychology ark Psychology has positives and negatives-two sides to the same coin. Where there’s light, there’s shade. Where there’s good, there’s evil. Dark Psychology is the science and application of mind control, coercion, motivation, and manipulation. It’s the tactics people use to get what they want. It’s present in more benign contexts such as advertising, sales methods, managers, and even parents sometimes use it to get their kids to behave. It can also be used for darker motives, such as criminal activity or in abusive relationships. Psychologists and criminologists have coined the phrase “The Dark Triad” to refer to the traits used in more nefarious circumstances. These include Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy. Our character’s dark side could refer to the parts of our personality that share some of these types of traits, but not to such extremes. First, we’ll be looking at the more positive side of Dark Psychology and its application. Positives of Using Dark Psychology Self-Awareness Most people have this side of themselves that they fear. They don’t want anyone else to see it. People see their dark side as a weakness. They fear the consequences of this side to their character. Sometimes they also feel that it can overpower them completely. But those who’ve accepted this side of their character have come to have confidence in themselves. It took time, but now they’re self-aware and self-assured. The dark side boldly helps people explore the flawed parts of themselves. Once they recognize their dark side, they’re no longer afraid of anything. The dark side isn’t as dark as people think. It can help to motivate us, stand up for ourselves, and influence others. There’s no need to seek approval from other people because the dark side hides our weaknesses and fears, and once you start to use it, nothing will stop you from achieving what you want. Manipulation Isn’t All Bad Our dark psychological side makes us very good at manipulation. Sometimes it’s necessary to use it to achieve a particular goal. As long as, of course, this manipulation doesn’t overstep the line. There are master manipulators all around us: politicians, leaders, salespeople, managers, advertisers, attorneys, public speakers, and others. People can use their dark side to influence people, and it’s not necessarily for evil gains. As long as there are boundaries, and no one is getting hurt, manipulation can be a highly effective strategy for further success and achievement. It Helps With Risk-Taking There’s nothing wrong with taking a risk if it doesn’t have a bad outcome. Many people don’t do the things they want to do just because they fear the consequences-especially when it comes to something fun. People who indulge their dark side tend to be risk-takers. They don’t worry about the consequences of their actions and tend to be more impulsive when it comes to decision-making. This means that they enjoy the freedom to experience life, let loose, and have more fun. Self-centredness Can Lead to Personal Growth Focusing on oneself doesn’t necessarily have to be bad unless it leads to extreme egoism and complete disregard for other people. When you focus on yourself, it allows you to find out what you want out of life and how you’re going to get it. It lets you base decisions on what’ll get you the most out of life and allows you to grow as a person. Self-centeredness can not only be very important for personal growth but also emotional maturity. Sometimes it helps people to entirely focus on themselves and make them understand their talents and their shortcomings. It can help them towards becoming a better person. Motivation People who indulge in their dark side are usually great at selling themselves. They’ve boundless confidence and motivation because they know what they want to get out of life. They’re wholly driven to achieve the results that they 47/83 need. This ability to sell themselves, combined with their motivation, makes them great people to be around. They can inspire others with their confidence and can help boost morale in a work setting. Perfectionism Indulging in your dark side enables you to become more critical-of yourself, as well as other people. You’ll always be striving to achieve, so you’ll be hyper-aware of your performance and those of others. It means that the margin for error is tiny, and you’ll be driving yourself and everyone to give their very best. As you can see, indulging in your dark side can have its advantages. However, you must be careful that it doesn’t mean slipping too far to the extreme edges of Dark Psychology. Now we’ll take a look at some of the disadvantages of using Dark Psychological tactics. Disadvantages of Using Dark Psychology Paranoia Someone’s dark side can make them highly suspicious of others. They’ll start to question everybody’s motives. Perhaps this is because they’re not above suspicion themselves. They’ll feel threatened in many ways, thinking that other people are planning to thwart their plans, even if there’s no truthfulness to it at all. They’ll continue to create scenarios in their heads that don’t really exist. They sense that there’s something or someone actively trying to harm them when, although, of course, this can never be proven. Even if something positive happens, they’ll still be suspicious and think something’s not quite right. It’s the dark side of the person that will suppress the positive side, and no matter how much someone wants to stop it, they can’t. This way of thinking has no benefits, can become increasingly severe, and may sometimes develop into mental illness. They Become a Harmful Manipulator As we know, indulging in your dark side means that you know a thing or two about how to manipulate others to get what you want. However, it’s one thing to influence people without any potential harm, and another to deceive or coerce people. Manipulative people are masters of deception and can use devious means to achieve their own goals. Manipulative people don’t tend to care about collateral damage. They just want to gain control, get what they want, and have others be unquestioningly supportive and complicit in their plans. They know how to trigger people and sometimes will even just toy with others for its fun. To them, lying, deceiving, and controlling people becomes a game. They Play the Victim People with a dark side like to play the victim, even if they’re guilty. They’ve got a habit of turning things around on the other person, making them feel as though they’re at fault and are to blame. These people don’t take responsibility for their own actions and use their power of manipulation to make others feel the heat. And because they’re so good at lying, at pulling the wool over people’s eyes, that they’ll most probably get away with it. They’re masters when it comes to playing the victim role. Like manipulation, they’ll use this role to get their own way or get out of a tricky situation. They don’t care what the cost is for other people. As long as their needs are met, they’re okay. They’re looking out for number one. They’re Not Sincere People with a dark side don’t tend to be sincere in any of their relationships. In fact, their relationships are based on manipulation, which can’t allow for much honesty or vulnerability on their side. Their loyalty is to no one, so if they show sincerity, others need to take it with a salt pinch. Likely, it’s just being used as a manipulative tactic; to draw their victims into a false sense of intimacy or trust. They lie not only to themselves, but they also lie to everyone around them. They’re not a genuine friend, and they’re not faithful. They’d do anything to make themselves dominant and more prominent, regardless of who the people standing in their way are. They’ll never form real, close, loving relationships with anyone because they don’t want to put themselves in a vulnerable position. To them, what’s important is their motives and how they’re going to achieve them. They can’t let relationships get in the way of that. 48/83 They Seem Hypocritical People on the dark side don’t treat other people fairly. They lie, play with others’ minds, and don’t care about their actions or consequences. Yet they accuse people of doing the very things they do to them. Being real is about being true to yourself and the people around you, and those subscribing to Dark Psychology are never truly themselves. They put a mask on their face to hide their real personality because the dark triad of their mind is overlapping the other side of their character. And at the very same time, they’ll claim that other people are being devious and disingenuous. All they’re doing is holding a mirror up to themselves. They Can Get Very Aggressive They may struggle to control their emotions, no matter how much they try. They’re always reacting to situations, especially anything that could damage their professional reputation. However, by not controlling their anger, they’ve got a genuine chance of doing that themselves. They feel they’ve complete freedom in reacting to certain situations, but that’s not the truth. The response must yield responsibilities. They should know that whatever they do, to never exceed the limits, but sometimes, they forget their limits because of their aggressive behavior. The rub is, they can also be incredibly sweet and charming. It leaves others dazed and confused. It’s perhaps also what lets them get away with this behavior for so long. However, soon their insecurities and their impulsiveness will drive away their most ardent supporters. They can be selfish and mean, especially when they feel defensive from personal attacks and criticism. They can also act this way unprovoked; they’ll happily bully and threaten other people and won’t stop until they completely break them down. It Makes Them Antisocial An antisocial person isn’t someone who avoids going out and interacting with people; being introverted and being antisocial are two different things. To be antisocial is to be anti-society. It means being actively harmful when dealing with other people to get what they want. They don’t care about other people. They’re self-centered and pose a threat to others because of their complete lack of empathy and impulsiveness. It’s one of the darkest sides of Dark Psychology, and when someone displays these traits, therapeutic intervention is necessary. They’ve No Limits Every person has specific limits or boundaries in their life. They know not to cross these because if they do, it’ll likely cause harm to other people. When people are so manipulative and can easily fool others, they’ve no limits because, in their eyes, everything they do is justified. Their motives are enough; the damage they cause is of no consequence to them. They’d do anything to achieve their goals- harassment, persuasion, violence, or seduction. They’re Egocentric They’d do anything to get attention, and they don’t care what it takes to get it. When people try to show them their place, they aren’t good at taking it. They don’t like criticism as it makes them feel exposed. To them, it’s the greatest of insults, as they believe that they’re perfect and that nothing they do is wrong. They Don’t Take Responsibility Whenever there’s a problem, they’ll blame other people for it, never themselves. In their eyes, they’re above blame. They Hunt People Like Prey They look for sensitive, emotionally vulnerable people because they know they’ve got a higher chance of manipulating them. People will initially be taken in because the dark side knows how to use charm and influence to draw people in. They only care about what can be given to them; they take, and they never deliver. People who get fooled by their charms may find it too late by the time they’ve discovered that this hunter is a self-centered, unemotional, master manipulator. 49/83 CHAPTER 11 Female Behavior and Dark Psychology ark Psychology is associated with the exploitation of humans. It’s psychology used for harmful or abusive ends. Although the subject tends to focus on male behavior when spoken about, its relation to the dark side of the female character shouldn’t be ignored. D Female behavior can also be highly antisocial, manipulative, selfish, and even abusive. But still, we tend to view women as non-threatening. When we hear about terrible crimes committed by women or stories of bad behavior, we see it as an anomaly and hold them less accountable for their actions than men. Not everyone is aware of the Dark Psychology horror and how it’s often played out by women and men. Usually, it’s displayed in women’s behavior towards other women. The dark side that women won’t often admit is there, let alone society acknowledging that it’s there. Despite female empowerment, women’s lib, and feminism, there’s something within every woman that has the potential to react against her own. Human behavior as a whole needs to be looked at, and that includes the darkest psychology of women. It needs to be examined and understood. After all, women can be just as harmful in their actions as men. Gossip Gossip, banter, scandal, whatever you want to call it, appears to be part of women’s fundamental nature. And for those on the dark side-those who’ve no limits or boundaries to their behavior, those who don’t care if someone else’s feelings are hurt-gossip will be thrown about without a second’s thought for who it could affect. It’s often seen as a trait of women. It’s a form of entertainment, a way to bond with other women, a distraction from the mundane. But it’s embarrassing-it’s a bad look for the gossipmonger. It can potentially ruin the reputation of the person being gossiped about and the person spreading the rumor. Someone who gossips won’t be seen as reliable or trustworthy. No one will go to them with their deepest, darkest secrets. Bad Mouthing Women criticize each other without even knowing they’re doing it. Older women turn on the younger ones; younger ones do it to their elders. In general, it’s an unhealthy practice. The thing is, it’s so common-place that most people don’t see it as a problem that needs to be dealt with. Giving Dirty Looks Women have perfected the art of looking each other up and down. It’s the action of someone eyeing up a potential threat. Unfortunately, it goes against the very idea of female empowerment. If women just view each other as competition, how will they stand together and fight each other’s corner? So, these little judgmental actions serve no purpose other than to make other women feel uncomfortable. But rather than confronting this dark side of their personality, most women will find it perfectly acceptable to carry on doing it. Insecurity and Jealousy It could be argued that women are more insecure compared to men. This is perhaps best demonstrated within relationships; when they feel vulnerable or scared that they may lose their partner, they’re likely to suffer from extreme emotional jealousy. It can occur at any age, and sometimes this insecurity and jealously can turn into an obsession if it’s not taken care of. Competitiveness Being competitive can often bring out the best in people, male or female. It becomes harmful, however, when the healthy competition turns into a kind of Cold War. When they try to demoralize, bring down, and destabilize their “opponent.” Women can have highly competitive characters and often compare themselves to other women, regardless of any relationship and friendship. It can bring out the worst in them. It’s always necessary to hold back the horses of the hidden and powerful demons on the dark side. Belittling Others The dark side of every person makes them think that they’re superior to others. They start to believe that the world 50/83 revolves around them. These women will try to belittle others because it’s easier to do this than show them gratitude, and they go out of their way to blame others. When they get criticized or get a reality check, they won’t try to change their ways. Instead, they’ll put others down to maintain a sense of superiority. This behavior is challenging, and women need to admit to themselves that they’re capable of it. Belittling others can be incredibly disruptive and counterproductive. Not every woman is like this, but there are certainly some whose dark side is more powerful compared to the other side of their character. Dark psychology isn’t only harmful, but it’s malicious. It can be difficult to warn people that their dark side is damaging themselves and other people, regardless of gender. However, women have generally been less well- informed about their dark side. The traits associated with it are seen as more self-defense-type mechanisms. And when boys and men are warned about the dark side of the feminine nature, there are cries of misogyny. There needs to be more honest talk and debate on the subject. The dark side of female nature isn’t considered dangerous, but this isn’t true. Women are capable of using their dark side just as effectively and destructively as men. It can cause precisely the same amount of emotional, psychological, or physical pain. The word “victim” is more often associated with women. It’s often said that men are programmed to conquer and have a greater propensity towards evil and violence. Throughout history, however, women have also performed violent acts. In many cases, they’ve shown that they’re great manipulators and have a dark psychological side to them. They generally take advantage of the stereotype that assumes they’re generally innocent. However, some positive aspects of Dark Psychology pertain to women that haven’t been studied thus far. We know that Dark Psychology highlights the more negative aspects of the female character and that it can have the same negative impacts as her male counterpart’s behavior. MEN’S BEHAVIOR AND DARK PSYCHOLOGY So, as you’ve read, Dark Psychology is real, and most of us are daily victims of it without even realizing it. Dark Psychology is the science of manipulation and mind control to convince others to do what you want them to do. The word “psychology” is associated with this concept because people use tactics of coercion and motivation of the mind to get what they want. Most of us may not want to hear it, but secret manipulation is often used by people you trust and people you love. For the women reading this, it’s essential to see how men behave around you and understand if they use Dark Psychology’s manipulation, coercion, and belief they want, men often manipulate women in different ways. tactics. To get what 1. Compliments/”Love Flooding”: They can shower you with love and affection to ensure that you return love at their request. It means they’ll butter you up until you agree to what they want you to do. They make you feel that you might as well fulfill their request because they love you so much, even if you don’t want to do it. It can be something as small as going to the house of his new friend who you feel uncomfortable with, or something more severe. People usually don’t realize that “giving excessive love” is a manipulation tactic. It’s not always necessarily hostile or dangerous, but it’s essential to identify all influence forms to ensure that we’re not fooled. 2. Giving Gifts: The man will flood you with gifts, so you’ll show some reciprocity. It’s human nature to feel compelled to give something back, not only as a form of thanks but also to compensate them for doing their very best. It’s precisely why some people use this strategy to get their way. 3. Love Denial: As the name suggests, it’s the opposite of Love Flooding. The man in your life will surrender their affection and stop giving you loving attention until you feel the need to do what they want, so you can get back some of the love and friendship. 4. Complete Withdrawal: This is one of the most apparent forms of manipulation. The majority of people understand that if someone avoids you or gives you the silent treatment, they’re manipulating you through guilt-tripping you and making you feel bad to induce guilt. Men you love do the same to get what they want from you. Dark Psychology recognizes this as one of the essential manipulation strategies. 5. Lying: This is the not-so-visible form of manipulation because it’s not so easy to recognize, until and unless you’re aware of all the pre-existing facts of the case. 51/83 The man will lie to trick you into doing something for him, and because you don’t know the reality of the situation, you’ll be persuaded to do it. There are other forms of speech, all of which are also included in this form of manipulation. Besides lying, they can exaggerate a story out of context, or maybe not even lie entirely, but tell you a partial truth. That means they choose to ignore or not mention essential parts of the story or situation. These are the parts you wouldn’t want to do, and ignoring those parts means you’ll be wrongfully forced. There’s not much you can do to avoid this kind of manipulation, unless you do your utmost to ensure that your male counterpart is honest with you. But mainly because of the existence of love and trust, women don’t question their men. 6. Semantic Manipulation: While not exactly lying, it’s somewhat of a passive form of it. This strategy means that the guy will talk to you in words with a double meaning. That means they use words that are believed to have a mutual definition, and so at the end of the conversation, you agree when the guy meant something completely different. But later, you won’t be able to get out of it because you would’ve made your promise, and out of guilt of not wanting to hurt the other person, you’ll be manipulated into doing what the man wants you to do. 7. Inverted Psychology: It’s human nature to want to do something you’re not supposed to do. We also see this tactic in parent-child relationships. Likewise, men will manipulate you by making you feel like you can’t do anything to get what they want from you. It’ll directly affect your ego and damage your self-esteem, and to fix it, you’ll want to prove they’re wrong. It’ll make you fall into their manipulative trap and eventually do what they wanted, even if they made you feel like it’s something you can’t do. For example, you meet a man, and he shows an interest in you, but you’ve no interest in it. To make you like him, he’ll say something in such a way that you want to prove him wrong. It’s a tactic to make you spend more time with them, giving them more influence in finding ways to keep you interested. 8. Restriction of Choices: This is the last of the tactics/strategies/behaviors used and implemented by men to convince you to do what they want you to do. It can be used in two ways: to let you make a choice they want you to make or avoid a decision they don’t want you to make. Firstly, he’ll ask you to do something, and if you don’t want to do it, he’ll give you more options. But they’ll be worse for you than the ones you turned down. In reality, however, you can simply ignore all choices and not do them; the man makes you feel like you have to make a choice. So, you’ll eventually go for the first option because they wanted you to do it. After all, it seems the least bad. Lastly, he’ll give you other choices in such a way that you’ll be distracted from the first decision/thing you wanted to do. This manipulation strategy can be divided into a class known separately as “Distractions,” but it’s still a sub-category of “Choice Restriction.” 9. Mind Games: This is used when there’s a struggle between two people when one wants to be dominant or superior over the other. People propagate mind games to manipulate those who want to make them inferior, so they say things they don’t mean or even go to extremes, such as embarrassing their partner. Some spouses will taunt and humiliate forced back home. lose her sense of self and quickly be their wives in public to In addition to using manipulative tactics to force women into their lives, men behave in certain ways using other psychological tactics elsewhere in their lives. The most prominent of these is in politics. It’s no lie that the majority of the world’s politicians are men. Extensive research was conducted on the gender ratio of politicians and state leaders, and as of December 2018, the participation of women in national parliaments at a global level was only 24.1%. And that includes the statistics of all those in developed countries. Developing countries have an almost negligible number of women who participate in politics. Male politicians in such countries use dark psychological manipulation tactics on the people they lead or want to potentially lead. They use persuasion tactics to convince the nation to vote for them by strengthening the population’s emotional state. Fascists use this tactic specifically, by the irrational blowing up of the concept of patriotism. It can be seen throughout history, even in today’s world, for example, Adolf Hitler during the Nazi era, Narendra Modi in India, and Kim Jong-un, now in North Korea. Not only this, but to maintain the status quo, these men also convince the nation to believe that a female politician isn’t suited to this type of work because they’re “overly emotional, brash and incapable.” 52/83 CHAPTER 12 Analyzing People Through Behavioral Psychology When you’re learning to analyze people, it’s your responsibility to understand them, what they say, and their identity. If you understand verbal and nonverbal cues, it’ll help you to look beyond the various masks we have and see the real person. People won’t usually readily tell us the whole story about them. You need to indulge in other essential data to figure out how to read the significant nonverbal natural signs that individuals present. To do this, you should also be happy to give up previously established beliefs or thinking, such as old feelings of hatred or prejudices that prevent you from truly seeing someone. The key is to remain objective and obtain impartial information. You need to be happy to leave behind old, limiting thoughts. People who read others well are willing to understand the hidden. They’ve figured out how to use their ”super senses” to look beyond what you already see and to access extraordinary intuitive experiences. THREE METHODS IN THE ART OF READING PEOPLE The First Technique: Pay attention to the signs of body language Various studies have shown that words make up only 7% of how we communicate. Nonverbal communication amounts to an incredible 55% of our interactions. For a successful attempt at reading nonverbal cues, try not to be too scientific about it. Be observant, but don’t freak the other person out. Stay loose and relaxed. Remember not to judge, so be kind. 1. Focus on appearance - What’re they wearing? Does it make them look professional? Casual? Seductive? - Are their clothes clean or disheveled? - Is their hair tidy or unkempt? - Are they wearing any jewelry that might indicate a spiritual or religious belief? 2. Observe their attitude - What’s their posture like? Do they sit and walk straight, or are they hunched or slouched? - Are they smiling or frowning? - Do they hold their head up high? - How do they walk? Do they use moderately-paced, determined steps, or do they walk slowly and hesitantly? Or are they rushing or pacing? 3. Observe the space between you and them - Where are they leaning towards: away from you or to you? - Are their arms or legs crossed? - Are their toes pointing towards or away from you? 4. Watch their hands - Do they keep their hands in their lap or pockets? They may be trying to hide something. 5. Lip or Fingernail Biting Someone may be doing this if they’re trying to relax under tension or in an uncomfortable circumstance. 6. Read facial expression 53/83 - Are they smiling or frowning? - Is their smile genuine (wrinkles around the eyes and mouth)? - Are their lips pursed or relaxed? - Is their jaw clenched or relaxed? The Second Technique: Listen to your intuition You can tune in to someone in a way that goes beyond listening to what they’re communicating to you through their nonverbal signs or words. You can do this through your instinct. Your instinct is what your gut is telling you, not what your head is saying. You glean it from nonverbal data that you pick up on, and it doesn’t have anything to do with logic. You can call it, picking up on someone’s vibe or someone’s “aura.” With instinct, you can look beyond the obvious to discover a fantastic story. List of intuitive ideas 1. Consider your gut feeling Tune in to what your emotions are saying, especially during first encounters. It’s an automatic response that takes place before you get a chance to think. It’s your inner truth meter telling you whether or not you can trust the person in front of you. 2. Feel the goosebumps Goosebumps are the tremendous, automatic chill that we experience when we encounter someone who moves us, makes us alert, or says something that we can relate to. It can be a positive or a negative reaction to someone or something. 3. Focus on flashes of thoughts During discussions, you may get an “ah-ha” moment about someone. Hold on to this thought. Often our first thought about someone is the right one. 4. Pay attention to intuitive empathy Occasionally you may feel the physical pain and feelings of individuals as if they were your own. The Third Technique: Feeling emotional energy Emotional energy, born out of our inner thoughts and feelings, is the “atmosphere” or “aura” that we radiate. We register this emotional energy with instinct. Some people radiate positive energy; we spend time with them and feel energized, happy, and comfortable. Other people have negative emotional energy; after interacting with them, we feel drained, unhappy, or irritable. We need to be aware of how others’ emotional energy can impact us. How to read emotional energy 1. Observe their presence This refers to the energy that we radiate out into the universe. It’s not our words or our behavior. - Do they have a friendly approach that attracts you? - Do they give you the “creeps”? - Do they make you feel calm? 2. Follow people’s eyes Our eyes radiate fantastic energy. Observing someone’s eyes is like looking into their soul. You can gather a lot from what someone’s inner thoughts and feelings are by looking at their eyes. - Do they seem observant and watchful? - Do their eyes seem to flash with anger? - Do their eyes have a cold, hard look to them? - Do their eyes seem to “smile”? - Do they hold your gaze, or are they quick to look away? 3. Note the sensation of a handshake, hug, or touch We share our emotional energy through physical contact, just like an electric current. Ask yourself, does a handshake 54/83 or a hug feel warm, pleasant, and safe? Or, on the other hand, is it unpleasant, making you want to back off? Are their hands moist? Do they avoid physical contact altogether? 4. Tune in to the tone of voice and laughter The tone and volume of our voice share a lot about our feelings. Sound frequencies cause vibrations that affect us emotionally. Notice how their way of speaking affects you. Does their tone convey confidence? Or is it grating, coarse, or whiny? Subconscious language The subconscious mind is seen as the source of creativity, instinct, motivation, inner knowing, interconnectedness, and spirituality. Within this domain, reality moves and grows, creating a more versatile and multidimensional grid than seen by the conscious brain. When we spend time in the subconscious mind, we’re released from the limits of our logical and rational brain. The messages we receive from our fantasies and ancient symbols, or the teachings of our ancestors, teach us what’s excellent, reliable, and sacred to each of us. As we consider these messages, we follow the path of our mind’s progress. These images and archetypes are essential components of the collective subconscious mind, the general intra- psychic organizing apparatus born to humans. It seems that the crucial progress data we’ve learned in previous eras have been given to us as an easy route to our development. If something related to human consciousness is discovered, it’s not essential to relearn it. It’s innate and permanent as a person. The “endless language” of the unconscious life in us always served to provide hints and information, offers, and directions. Figuring out how to get to the subconscious mind and ultimately harness its potential can help us see differently. In addition to our conscious brain and regular detection, coverage is lifted, exposing a universe of boundless possibilities. What’s so pervasive here is that words are powerless to tell or convey a message. The symbol, the authentic image or design, moves through the whole idea or concept without using words to describe it. The thought is compelling because of how we “talk” to ourselves, our internal language, how we know our identity comes not from words but from the constant source that understands our character. A short instruction exercise, if you’re still unclear. The left hemisphere controls the vast majority of neuromuscular and motor function on the right. The right half controls the left side. However, there’s a stark contrast in terms of the quality and character of the hemisphere. The region’s left side is heavily engaged in intelligent, analytical thinking, such as verbal and numerical skills. The right side of the territory, on the other hand, is generally liable for direction in space, self-perception, recognition of appearances, and imaginative endeavors. The right side of the body or mind of the body is related to the masculine, and its features are “self-confidence, aggressiveness, and coercion.” The left side is seen as feminine, and its attributes are “emotionality, lack of involvement, creative idea, and holistic expressions.” An interesting ongoing hypothesis recommends that a “holistic, synchronous, synthetic, and solid perspective of the female viewpoint: straight, sequential, reductionist, and conceptual world are reasoning characterizes the masculine.” features of a the basic Each individual has the full limit on both sets. In a perfect world, these should exist in the same way, no more critical or stable than the others. Leonard Shlain, in The Alphabet Vs. The Goddess presents compelling evidence suggesting that the appearance of the compound word, and then the letters in sequence, has changed the view of recently educated societies. Word and images are “correlative contrasts” that they must coexist on an equal footing. While the summarized organizations made everything feminine, advances toward the written word supported the male-male culture, which dominated in the long run. While this hypothesis is relatively incredible and can clarify a significant portion of how things have found a workable pace as they are, that’s not the point. What’s often necessary is the possibility of using mental imagery and symbolism to communicate. The corruption of the idea of the word is our way of thinking if mankind has been in danger. It may clarify the failure of holistic expression about the right cerebrum. It’s recommended that TV, film, and the internet reintroduce the images representing heightened awareness and full expression. We can hope this is real. 55/83 TRICKS TO ANALYZE OTHERS AND CHANGE WHAT OTHERS BELIEVE How to Analyze People Create a baseline People have different views and behavioral patterns. While talking to us, people are often clearing their throats, gazing at the floor, flailing their arms around, stroking their necks, hunching their shoulders, pouting, frowning, shaking their legs... Sometimes, we don’t even notice when they do it. Often, when we do, we find them rude. In this world, people perform these little gestures for various reasons. It could just be “their way,” like a nervous tic, and nothing to read into. Occasionally, however, these same movements could also reveal dishonesty, annoyance, and nervousness. Studying someone’s normal behavior-their baseline-will help you realize when there’s more to their gestures than meets the eye. Look for anomalies Pay attention to inconsistencies in a person’s behavior with the baseline you’ve established. You may have noticed that they’ve got a habit of repeatedly clearing their throat when they’re nervous or afraid. When you notice moderately small changes in their baseline, you can probe further by asking specific questions that’ll help uncover the true meaning behind their words. Notice clusters of signs Clusters of communication cues (body language or facial expressions) could be significant and help you interpret the true meaning behind someone’s words. For example, if your car dealer is consistently clearing his throat, touching his nose, and shifting about on his feet, it could indicate that he’s not entirely truthful. Remember to work carefully. You must be comparing and contrasting; certain tics or nonverbal signs may just be a part of someone’s normal behavior. When meeting someone for the first time, observe how they communicate with you. Note, also, if they speak the same way with others. How and when does that person change their facial expressions? How do they behave with others, and how do they talk to other people? How do they use body language to communicate? Watch for mirroring A mirror neuron is a neuron that’s activated when we take action and then see it being performed by someone else. Mirror neurons are integral to our emotional intelligence. They allow us to learn through imitation body language, facial expressions, and emotions. They allow us to reproduce the mood of others. When we read another person’s body language, we’re able to mirror or mimic it. A person’s smile activates the power of a smile on our face, while a frown triggers our frown muscles. If you find people aren’t mirroring your actions in social interactions, it can send a strong message. For example, if someone isn’t smiling back at you, it could mean they’re not interested in you, and perhaps you shouldn’t continue further with your interaction. Identify the strongest voice in the room The most influential person in a room will tend to be the one who speaks and carries themselves in a self-assured manner. Confident people tend to have a strong voice, speak with sincerity and clarity, carry themselves with dignity, and smile openly and broadly. However, never confuse a strong voice with one that’s merely loud. It’s easy to think that the person talking the loudest is a natural leader. But that person may have a weak personality. Their loudness could be masking deep insecurities or weaknesses. They may rely heavily on others to make decisions or be easily influenced. A strong voice-full, deep, and convincing-signals somebody with leadership potential. Seek these people out, and try to establish a rapport. Watch how people move People reveal a lot about themselves through the way they move. If someone walks with their head held high and chest open, making long, purposeful strides, chances are that they’re a confident person with a positive outlook on life. Someone moves more hesitantly, with hunched shoulders and their head down; they may be more pessimistic or lack self-esteem. When you note how people walk, stand, and generally move around, you’ll be able to get a better idea about their character, personality, and attitude to life. Listen to the words people use Listen clearly to the types of words people are using. Are they using many motivating words or phrases, such as “I can do this” or “That’s a great idea”? This may indicate that they’re a go-getter, someone who’s a zest for life and likes to be successful. Someone like this may make a good boss or leader. A person’s words represent their 56/83 visions, their viewpoints, and their attitude. You need to clearly understand what they’re saying to you, what kind of terms they choose while talking to you. Yes, actions do speak louder than words. Often, words signal an intent; they can be a call to action and a hint at someone’s inner world. Look for specific clues about personality Every person has a unique character. There are clues to help you better read or determine someone’s personality: What general behavior traits do they exhibit? Do they appear ambitious in terms of relationships and life success? How do they deal with anger or uncertainty? How do they feed their ego? How would they act under extreme stress? What kind of behavior do they show when they’re delighted about something? Be aware of generational differences You need to clearly understand the characteristics of a social group, community, or generation that a person belongs to understand that individual’s viewpoints, ambitions, character, and attitudes. The generation gap can be perfectly exemplified in how “millennials” and “baby boomers” prefer different modes of communication. Millennials are happy to sit behind their computer screens or on their mobile phones, voicing their opinions on Twitter, Instagram, Tik Tok, Facebook, and blogs. They connect with others via the medium of technology and have grown up with the internet. They’re used to interacting with others in a non-face-to-face capacity. Baby boomers, on the other hand, like to talk to someone personally. Some experts say that if you consider someone’s generation, you’ll know the best method for building a bond. For millennials, making a business deal could quickly be done via Skype or Zoom. For baby boomers, they’d probably prefer to meet in person before making any decisions. Listen more than you talk It’s far better to have “big ears” and a “small mouth” when trying to form a bond with someone. The best way to initiate a relationship is to actively listen to someone. You must ask open questions to enable the individual to share their strengths with you and tell you their experiences, hopes, and dreams. When they know that you’re interested and really listening to them, they’ll start to ask you questions, too. By agreeing on a topic of discussion, asking questions, and properly listening, you’ll be able to get a much better understanding of someone’s character flaws and virtues. Look out for strengths and weaknesses It’s a good idea to observe and note their capabilities and weaknesses to determine who people are as individuals and what’s important to them. For example, someone who thinks and reasons systematically is likely to make a good scientist or academic. Someone who’s a very firm handshake may be confident and used to negotiating and managing big business deals. A person who talks clearly and concisely and can make sense of complicated ideas could be a teacher. Note nonverbal communication Nonverbal behavior, such as body language, is significant and subject to much discussion and research. For example, we could say that if someone leans forward towards you, they’re engaged and interested in what you’re saying. If they back away, look down or turn slightly away from you, it means that they’re not connected to what you’re saying. It’s also essential to tune your ear into the more subtle sounds people produce or how they speak. Quality of speech-tone, volume, speed-can provide vital clues to a person’s character or attitude. For example, if someone responds to you in a monotonous tone, they’re probably not interested in your ideas or what you’ve just said. If someone murmurs words like, “sure,” “really,” and “hmm,” it’s likely that they’re interested in you and fully engaged. Picking up on subtleties in speech is more difficult when you’re communicating over the phone. We’re more likely to miss out on cues, such as sighs of exasperation or slight trembles in someone’s voice. You’ll need to develop a good ear to listen out for more subdued sounds and changes in tone. Always pay attention to dress and appearance Is someone dressed for success-smart clothing, polished shoes, carefully-styled hair-or are they more casually dressed in jeans and a T-shirt. The former may suggest that the person is ambitious and self-confident. The latter may signal that someone is very relaxed. Take note of what people wear and how they groom themselves. It’s often an excellent indicator of their state of mind, their social status, their ambition, their intent, or their general well- being. It can also show any spiritual or political leanings the person possesses, such as wearing religious symbols as jewelry. 57/83 Try to pick up on “attitude.” When trying to read people’s character, you should always ask yourself: is their head held high, showing that they’re confident? Or do they walk indecisively or hunched over-a sign of low self-esteem or uncertainty? Do they brag while puffing out their chest, which could be a sign of arrogance? Look out for how the person carries themselves, how they move, what gestures they use, and how they sit. These are all good giveaways. Also, look out for how people move when interacting with you. Do they lean away, cross their arms, and try to distance themselves slightly? Or do they move a bit closer to listen to what you have to say? Generally, we tend to lean to people we like or are interested in and distance ourselves from people who disinterest or bore us or who we don’t trust. Cross arms or legs are a sign of defensiveness, a subconscious gesture suggesting that they’re either angry or mistrustful. Typically, when people direct their toes towards someone, it means that they’re comfortable with them. Turned away feet means someone could literally be looking for the door-they want to get away from you! Someone who leaves their hands in their pockets or behind their back could be hiding something or not being truthful. Open arms and palms suggest honesty and openness. Lip or nail-biting and skin picking may be signs of self-soothing in situations where a person is uncomfortable or stressed. Be aware of facial expressions Feelings can be printed all over a face. Look out for signs of concern, anger, or reflection, such as furrowed brows or lip curls. Spontaneous wrinkles around the eyes and mouth are the rays of joy someone is feeling. Wrinkled lips indicate annoyance, contempt, or anger. Teeth grinding and clenched jaws are signs of tension. Listen to your intuition Your intuition means listening to your instincts. It’s otherwise known as your “gut feeling.” Your intuition relies more on nonverbal information that you perceive through observing someone’s mannerisms and general demeanor. If you want to truly understand someone, you need to try and get to their “essence.” Intuition shows you that there’s more to the story. You should always listen to your gut feelings, especially during first encounters. That instinctive reaction that happens before you’ve got the chance to overthink is often precious. Your instinct communicates to you whether or not you feel comfortable. Instinctive feelings happen quickly and could be considered the original and best reaction to a situation or a person. Instincts are your inner rhythm of facts, and they talk to you. People should never underestimate their instincts’ validity or importance. Do you get goosebumps? Goosebumps are a great spontaneous physical reaction when we hear something that surprises, moves, or stimulates us. If someone gives you goosebumps, it could be your way of telling yourself that you’re excited, scared, or need to be cautious. Goosebumps can also be a sign of déjà vu, the sensation of having lived through the present moment at some point in the past. Pay attention to flashes of insight Stay alert while communicating with others. Listen carefully to what someone is saying and how they’re expressing it. If you’re more involved, you’ll experience a lightbulb moment, for example, where you think, “Aha, that’s interesting!” You can gain a better insight into other people, and your own understanding of yourself, by listening correctly. Be empathetic Occasionally, we may be able to experience the physical or mental experiences of someone else. This is an extreme form of empathy, a tacit understanding of someone else’s pain or thought processes. When we express or experience empathy, it opens us up to other people. It allows us to better explore their inner workings, their hopes, and their fears. It also enables others to feel more connected to us and more likely to respond to us favorably. Pick up on emotional energy Emotions are a spectacular expression of our inner strengths or weaknesses. Some people have good emotional energy; they’ll restore your nature and strength. Others may have poor emotional energy; they’ll tend to drain you or put unfair demands on you. In Chinese medicine, this life force is called “chi,” and it’s the energy flow essential for health. The general force we radiate doesn’t necessarily correspond to our words or our behavior. You can try to read 58/83 other people’s emotional energy by asking yourself if they’ve got a friendly appearance that radiates warmth and attracts other people. Or do they tend to make other people nervous or on edge? Always observe the eyes Our eyes cast immense influence over others and transmit important information about our inner thoughts and feelings. Take some time to analyze people’s eyes. Are they kind? Do they twinkle? Do they radiate calm? Do they tend to flash with anger? Also, ask yourself if the eyes keep a steady, confident gaze or if they tend to shift or look away. The eyes are the window to the soul; observing others’ will help you develop a better understanding of who they are as a person. Notice handshakes and embraces We transmit our emotional energy through physical interaction- just like an electric current. Ask yourself if a handshake or a hug feels genuine, satisfying, or confident. Or is that physical touch unpleasant, limp, or too firm? Keep note of what these physical interactions feel like. They reflect the other person’s character and how they feel about themselves or about you. Listen out for tone of voice The quality and volume of our voice reveal much about our emotions, inner thoughts, and personality. It can also influence how we make people around us feel or respond to us. Take note of how different people’s voices have different effects on you. Some have soothing tones, which make you want to stick around. Others may have whiny or overbearing voices, which make you want to run a mile. How to Change What People Believe Practice what you preach If you want other people to change, start by taking a careful look at yourself. Make sure you practice what you preach. If you’re trying to alter someone’s beliefs or actions, they’ll be looking to you as an example. Make sure you’re not “all talk.” People are far more likely to respond favorably or agree with you if they perceive you as someone who stays true to their word. They need tangible evidence that any changes they make in their life will be positive and not in vain. Let’s take teachers as an example. Many teachers make it a point to work in rooms with the doors open. This is a smart move; it shows students that they’re hard at work, even when class is finished, it communicates openness and accessibility and allows them to have their “ear to the ground” in terms of what’s going on outside of the classroom. When a teacher behaves like this, their students are more likely to respond favorably towards them. They’ll see a teacher who’s diligent, friendly, and involved with the rest of the school community. It makes it far more likely that this teacher will get good results from their students. Their class will tend to listen more and have greater respect for their tutor. Plus, if this teacher also engages in research, writes articles, organizes activities, undertakes extra tuition, or does administrative work, they’ll be in the good books of the rest of their school too-parents, faculty staff, and the school board. When people observe an individual who’s succeeding in life, who’s involved with their community, who’s open to discussion, and who takes the time to help out others, they’ll be encouraged to copy that behavior and attitude listen to that individual. People are only likely to be influenced by someone they see as authentic-someone who’s true to themselves and others. Set goals A goal is a final objective that provides a focus for your motivational energy. Long-term goals tend to need more energy; it’s hard to keep focused when the end isn’t yet in sight. Whether a goal is long-term or short-term will have an effect on the individual’s actions and behavior. Many people are keen to get quick results and focus their mental and physical energy on more immediate gains. If you want to help someone change, your job is to help them set daily short-term goals that’ll eventually lead to long-term success. They have to look at it as the commercial sale of a product. Most businesses would go bust if they only sold one product to one person, once. The short term goal (making a sale) may be one step to success, but it’s certainly not the only step. To make a profit, the business needs to keep selling, and this is where other goals have to be made and met. They need to employ salespeople, take out TV or 59/83 newspaper ads, and think of promotional campaigns. The same goes for wanting to lose weight. The end goal is essential, but it may seem an overwhelming task at first. Equally vital is setting yourself small goals along the way. You may decide that you’ll stick to going for a run twice a week or only eating one candy bar once a week. You also need to be reminded of what you want to achieve. It may mean that you leave little notes on your refrigerator or hang your gym bag by your front door so you don’t forget it. Give appropriate feedback We’ve tremendous power to influence people’s attitudes and behavior by the feedback we provide them. Therefore, we need to be mindful of what we say to others and how we say it. This is particularly true in instances where we’re trying to cause a change (in others’ actions or beliefs). Let’s say you’re at a restaurant with a friend who’s on a diet. The waiter comes over and asks what you want for dessert, and your friend replies, “Nothing for me. Just a coffee, please.” You then say to your friend, “Wow! I don’t know how you do it. You must have a lot of willpower.” Your intention is to show admiration and encouragement, to tell your friend that you think they’re doing great with their diet. However, the word “willpower” implies they have to struggle to fight some sort of impulse. Willpower can come and go, depending on our mood. If your friend was to find themselves in a weak moment, would their ability to refuse dessert be the same? It’d be far better to say, “Wow! I love how you’re making healthy choices. And you look great. I think I’ll hold off on dessert, too. Tell me more about it...” It’s far more effective to give positive feedback, one thought focusing on strength rather than potential weakness or susceptibility to failure. With the second response, you’re still conveying your message of admiration while forcing your friend to reinforce their own success and long-term goal by getting them to talk about their diet. Feedback can be tailored according to different personalities and to what you’re trying to encourage a person to change about themselves. Some experts state that positive and negative feedback has different mental effects on people. Positive feedback helps people to engage with you and your message. Negative feedback is sometimes suitable for encouraging people to develop. However, when people first change their behavior, the positive reaction is appreciated because it helps them feel a better sense that they’ll reach their goals. It’s always best to aim for constructive criticism: helpful feedback, which gives the other person specific suggestions on how to help them make positive improvements or change. This first phase of behavioral change can be a delicate time, so it’ll be helpful to reinforce the person’s commitment to change. However, over time, people can deviate from their path; they may grow bored or discouraged and feel they’re achieving too little (or nothing at all). At this stage, they’re adversely affected by negative feedback, as it’s a stark reminder of where they’re now and where they need to be. They won’t feel good about themselves and will respond more favorably to positive comments or reinforcements. However, in the last phase of change or development, optimistic feedback is sometimes not as inspiring as negative feedback. While it can be problematic to give bad feedback, it’s sometimes essential to make people feel discomfort when working with them to change behavior. When you serve people to fulfill their calling, you can utilize uncomfortable truths to help spur them on towards their end goal. Always support good habits When someone wants to change the behavior of the people around them, they have to think about creating reliable, consistent tasks. Are there ways to get people to reorganize their environment in a way that supports healthy habit creation? How can you get people to take action so often that it becomes a habit? An example of healthy, sustained habit creation? Imagine a hospital environment. It’s been discovered that the infection rate associated with IV use within the ICU is high. The hospital decides to assign one nurse to ensure that procedures regarding sanitary insertion of IVs are adhered to and monitored. Cleaning packs are distributed for the use of IVs. Each clinical staff member is instructed on using these packs and told that the steps must be adhered to every time. Soon after these practices are introduced and become commonplace, the infection rate dramatically reduces. This mix of alterations within the hospital setting and clinical staff’s routine formed a reliable mapping that became a healthy habit. It reduced the occurrence of IV infections to almost zero, which significantly improved patient outcomes. Taking advantage of people’s laziness The harder it becomes for someone to behave poorly or continue with a bad habit-in terms of energy and time they have to spend on it-the more likely they’ll stop that behavior. People’s laziness can be used to produce a change for the better! The easiest way to make this possible is to change people’s environments. For example, prohibiting smoking in office settings, including all public areas, forces smokers to walk far whenever they want to light up. Chances are, 60/83 those individuals will significantly reduce their daily intake of cigarettes, as it just takes too much effort. 61/83 CHAPTER 13 Role of Emotional Intelligence in the Workplace Emotional intelligence (EQ) helps in different life areas but is especially crucial in the workplace. Possessing it can take you further in your career. The ability to accept constructive, guilt-free, blame-free feedback will help you grow as an employee and succeed in your profession. EQ is beneficial in the workplace because you’re less likely to make mistakes or make bad decisions that can affect performance. You can also use logic and reasoning to focus before responding to people or situations. EQ is central to a productive workplace. People with EQ are better able to manage tensions, solve problems, and cooperate with others. Business EQ, or the ability to understand your feelings and others’, is essential no matter what company you’re in. By perfecting your EQ skills, you can gain a competitive advantage over others (and likely improve your income and job satisfaction) by successfully working with people and solving complex problems. People’s EQ and related skills are critical-because people are an essential part of any business. Emotions are crucial pieces of information that must be weighed when making decisions, even if it means knowing when to block them. Controlling emotions is at the heart of people’s ability to be flexible and open to change, collaborate, seek input, take risks, deal with conflict, and perform under pressure. If emotions aren’t under control, it’ll damage partnerships and cooperation, hinder innovation, and disrupt an organization’s success. While the ability to use emotions to improve motivation and concentration also includes EQ, it also consists of the skill, if necessary, to break away from potent short-term emotions to better focus on the tasks at hand. Because of the dominant role emotions play in managing strategies and dealing with subordinates, managers must be especially aware of and critically focus on their negative emotions that may arise in the workplace. Leaders can improve their EQ by taking a moment to learn about people and become more self-aware about their own emotions. If you practice becoming more aware of your own feelings and reactions to others, you’ll become more empathetic. For leadership positions, EQ is also helpful. At work, leaders supervise and manage people, and that quality helps make them accessible, empowered, and critical. The emotional maturity of leadership also implies dealing with stressful situations and dealing with problems without shouting or blaming others. As it becomes more critical to hire the right employees in this competitive world, there are now some practical ways to find qualified people and EQ. Companies and organizations have become acutely aware that emotionally intelligent people are usually the best employees. A person with emotional intelligence is optimistic, empathetic, an excellent communicator and listener, definite, willing to accurately convey highs and lows of their days, and someone with extraordinary people skills and a difference-maker. You’ve updated yourself and are high on Maslow’s needs ladder. Emotionally intelligent leaders know how to handle tension in a way that motivates rather than discourages their team. They also know why their team players react in a certain way. Quality is sometimes linked to emotion, and leaders with EQ can distinguish what makes their team happy. Promoting a healthy environment can increase productivity. EQ is the ability to reason about emotions and sensitive facts, and thought-enhancing emotions are essential to understanding ourselves and others’ feelings to strengthen interpersonal relationships. High emotional intelligence is associated with better work efficiency, better teamwork, more innovation, employee engagement, and change acceptance. In addition to the workplace, emotionally smart people also enjoy better interpersonal relationships at home. EQ is one of the pillars of a successful life, and self-awareness is one of the roots of emotional intelligence. Emotional intelligence tells the people around you about your feelings and the world. And self-awareness is trained to show you how to identify your feelings, their causes, and their response to them. It’s a difficult task to develop EQ, but it’s a great way to improve your relationship with others. One way to build EQ is to control your thoughts. 62/83 Watch your feelings deal with your emotions all day long. Thoughts release chemicals in the brain that control the way we do things. When we realize that relationship, we’ll work to reduce the negative emotions we feel. By not empowering the thoughts that cause negative emotions, we’re dealing with positive emotions and focusing on the ideas. Trust and EQ both play essential roles in our social life simply because they enable you to survive. You can’t meet your requirements without confidence. You can’t understand the emotional environment in the room without EQ. You can learn EQ; it’s a lifelong operation. And it’s never too late; it only requires constant study and practice. No matter how old or young you are, you can still incorporate EQ and make your life better and healthier. EQ is key to creating a healthy mind, making the most of life, and creating a safer world through our behavior. In today’s dysfunctional world, our best hope for an optimistic future is emotional intelligence. 63/83 DISCOVER HOW YOU CAN BE SUCCESSFUL AT WORK BY ACQUIRING EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE Developing emotional intelligence (EQ) will help in personal life, but it’ll allow the individual to succeed in other areas, such as their workplace. Some of the benefits of EQ in the workplace are: Better teamwork People with higher EQ work well together because of their excellent communication skills. They trust each other’s instincts and listen to others’ suggestions. People with a higher EQ listen to others’ opinions, analyze the tips, and work accordingly. These individuals give each member of the team a voice and make them feel part of a group. A team that encourages each member’s growth is more productive compared to a team that doesn’t work to the same standards. So, when people feel valued, they work more effectively, which benefits their company. Handling change better Today, industries and, therefore, workspaces are continually evolving. The companies operating under these changes need to change and adapt to thrive. Companies and organizations have to continuously adapt their working methods to stay relevant and profitable. For this purpose, individuals in the workplace should also stay informed and be prepared for different types of change. A person who can effectively deal with change and be productive is an asset to a company. Developing EQ enables an individual to deal with these changes more effectively. Good communication skills Practical communication skills are vital for most organizations. Communication is needed to present ideas and concepts, sell or market products, negotiate deals, and deal with clients, colleagues, and management. Individuals with EQ can express themselves clearly and concisely, are open to questions, answer questions thoughtfully and effectively, and won’t let emotions (such as frustration, anger, or disappointment) get in the way of their interactions with others. Therefore, EQ is vital within a company or work environment that wishes to stay productive and thriving. Today, EQ is an essential criterion when hiring employees. Good social skills EQ helps people connect and creates bonds and trust between individuals. Trust is necessary for a workspace, whether between a boss or an employee, or a customer and a company. If a boss trusts their employee to work on a big project, that employee has an excellent opportunity to learn and progress, which may ultimately lead to promotion. If a customer trusts a company, it’ll help the company retain that customer, in turn creating sales and profit. It makes good leaders The traits associated with EQ are the same traits that make a good leader. These include having excellent social and communication skills, empathy, and self-awareness, and emotional regulation. A good leader can communicate effectively in the workspace so that their colleagues have a clear idea of ​their common goal. An effective leader can most effectively represent their company and recognize and utilize their employees’ skills to assign work or customers. A leader must listen to, value, and analyze the opinions of all their team members. It’ll help give the leader a broader perspective and more options to consider before making a decision. These are examples of how EQ is an essential quality for a leader to possess and why EQ will bring success into the workplace. A solid problem-solving approach People with high EQ not only own their problems but also try to solve them. Such individuals identify the loopholes in a plan and work to narrow them as much as possible. It helps the company and, ultimately, the individual. A better understanding of a person’s strengths and weaknesses A good leader can recognize their subordinates’ strengths and weaknesses and act accordingly to benefit both the company and the individuals. To this end, an effective leader must also know their own strengths and weaknesses and take constructive measures. 64/83 For example, imagine a situation where an employee has strong technical skills but is lacking in communication. Their boss can decide that it doesn’t matter; their technical expertise is what’s most important at this moment in time. Getting the job done is enough. However, another approach the boss could take is deciding to develop the individual’s communication skills. His reasoning? It’ll help the individual in the long run. A good leader makes decisions based on the present and considers the long-term effects of their choices. Good persuasion skills People with excellent communication skills tend to have good persuasion skills. They know how to listen appropriately, talk assertively, and gain the trust of others. Avoiding unnecessary drama People with high EQ regulate their emotions effectively and help other individuals regulate their emotions. This helps prevent unnecessary arguments, conflict, or drama at work. More motivation People with higher EQ are more motivated to achieve their goals. It’s because they carefully analyze the possible outcomes of every decision they make and are well prepared if something goes wrong. They can quickly adapt to change and remain optimistic about working more effectively without losing their motivation. Staying positive The key to productivity in the workplace could be said to be a positive attitude. Maintaining a positive attitude helps on an individual level and helps regulate people’s emotions in their environment. The team will remain committed to achieving their goals regardless of any hiccups along the way. An EQ person prefers to work in a productive and positive work environment, and their own qualities are an excellent example to the people around them. 65/83 EXERCISES THAT HELP REDUCE ANXIETY: YOGA, MEDITATION, AND MASSAGE Mental health experts often recommend exercise as part of the treatment of mental illness. Exercise eases many indications of depression, including fatigue, stress, and anger, and those of panic disorders and other anxiety disorders. Exercise is a healthy, productive way to ease stress, tension, and anxiety. It also decreases the sensitivity to the body’s response to nervousness. A regular exercise program can help people overcome some of the debilitating symptoms of mental unrest or imbalance. We shall be taking a look at some of these different types of exercise. Yoga Yoga works to reduce stress and relieve physical tension and is also a form of strength training. It’ll make you more flexible and more dynamic. Yoga also uses deep breathing, which triggers the body’s relaxation response. Several studies have confirmed that yoga also lowers blood pressure. One of the main benefits of yoga is the emphasis on mindfulness that it promotes. Concentration is key to stress management. Practicing the positions correctly requires attention and focus, keeping your mind alert to what you’re doing rather than worrying about other things. Some yoga classes, such as Hatha, are softer and mainly focus on stress relief, while others, such as Ashtanga, Vinyasa, and Bikram, are more “physical.” A great benefit is that it can either be done with others in a class or alone at home. Practicing yoga will keep your body fit and healthy, and your mind relaxed and stress-free. Tai Chi This form of exercise also works to reduce stress. Derived from an ancient Chinese martial art, it connects physical drive with the breath. It’s also known as meditation in motion, emphasizing the present moment to help dispel worry and stress. Tai chi also increases flexibility and energy levels, resulting in a better sense of well-being. This exercise also has other benefits, including helping to gain better balance, a good night’s sleep, and better blood circulation. Tai chi contains more than 108 gentle movements and thirteen postures. Like yoga, there’s an emphasis on breathing, and there are numerous styles that vary in strength. In yoga, you stretch to relax, and in tai chi, you relax to stretch. Qigong Qigong is an exercise incorporating coordinated body-posture movement, breathing, and meditation. Practicing qigong can promote feelings of serenity, improve sleep and digestion, and increase energy. The slow, gentle actions and emphasis on moving in harmony with the breath are calming to an anxious system. Walking Walking also helps to overcome stress. It can be done at a relaxed pace and requires no lessons or special equipment. Walking can limit the occurrence of many stress-related conditions, such as circulatory and vascular diseases, high blood pressure, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. People who walk regularly report reduced stress levels and increased self-confidence. When the muscles are used, it releases tension, while physical activity releases endorphins, which improves mood. The focus on breathing calms the nervous system. And all the better if you get the opportunity to go for a walk in nature. Five or six 30-minute walks a week is a good standard to aim for to keep your mental and physical health in tip-top condition. Gardening Gardening is an excellent low-impact workout. Weeding alone can burn up to 200 calories per hour. But gardening has the added bonus of getting you back in touch with nature-a great stress-busting activity. Plus, getting rid of all those weeds will make you feel productive and happy with the results. Dancing Dancing has many physical, mental, and even emotional benefits. It’s a great workout that improves grace and agility as it increases your heart rate and lifts your mood. Plus, studies have shown that people who ballroom dance twice a week are less at risk of developing dementia. Learning new steps helps to keep your brain engaged and ticking. 66/83 Dancing also stimulates a sense of social interaction if done in a class setting. Social activities with a shared sense of purpose lower stress levels and bring happiness to the participants. Many types of music or dance bars offer free dance classes. Partners aren’t often required; all you need are comfortable shoes and a sense of fun. Circuit Training Circuit training involves alternating intervals of strength training and cardio, with short rest periods in between. The result is a high-intensity workout that provides a quick, effective boost to your health. It stimulates your body’s endorphins (therefore restoring your mood and reducing stress), builds stamina, and burns calories. The best thing? You get results in less time than other forms of exercise would take. Tennis As with other forms of cardio training, tennis can stop many stress-related conditions, including high blood pressure and heart disease, and releases those all-important feel-good chemicals-endorphins. Playing tennis helps you to stay connected with your friends. Social interaction is an important way to reduce stress, avoid boredom, and stay happy. Swedish Massage Swedish massage aims to warm up muscle tissue to release and get rid of toxins, tightness, and sensitivity. The massage strokes are longer and more relaxed than many other massage methods and are usually done using the hands. The strokes go up along the shoulders, down the back, and up again. Swedish massage is done with lighter or deeper pressure, depending on what the client prefers. It’s very soothing and relaxing and ideal for someone who’s never tried massage therapy before. Deep Tissue Massage This is the manipulation of the body’s soft tissues. It’s usually done more with the forearm to apply more pressure. The two most common techniques are: Petrissage. This involves kneading the body. The therapist uses this technique to get blood flow into a disturbed part of the body. It’s usually used in a specific section of the body rather than as a whole-body treatment. Friction heats the muscles and helps transport more targeted blood movement to an area. Tapotement is a group of massage movements using some part of the hand . It’s a fast, rhythmic tapping movement, usually with a higher pressure force than typically used in other types of massage. The most in-depth tissue massages are done at a slower pace, with explanations from the therapist to the client. Sometimes it feels uncomfortable, to begin with, but proper breathing will enable the person to feel its benefits. Trigger Point Release Massage This type of massage aims to get into those little, tight knots that develop in our muscles. It’s often done with the thumb and knuckle or elbow to apply static pressure to those trigger points to release the pain. This type of massage is meant to be more therapeutic than relaxing, as it aims to treat pain and tight muscles. It may be uncomfortable at first, but the results are worth it. Hot Stone Massage Some people may be dubious about the effectiveness of using hot stones to relax and relieve tension. However, it’s been shown to bring many therapeutic benefits. A therapist will use smooth, heated stones on the body’s specific points and may also hold the stones while giving a massage. The stones’ heat and weight relax the muscles, so the therapist can apply deeper pressure to release tension. The result? A comforting, soothing, and relaxing experience. Sports Massage This massage is carried out before and after a person’s been involved in some sporting activity. It’s not usually as “soothing” as other massage types; therapists will apply quick, hard pressure to the muscles to reduce stiffness and pain. It’s perfect for anyone physically active. It’ll keep the active individual healthy, free of tension, and make them feel less stiff. Finding the Right Therapist Most massage therapists are trained in Swedish and in-depth tissue massage. You need to go to someone with specific training, who’s qualified, and experienced in the methods they practice. 67/83 A qualified massage therapist will look at your health history, background, relevant tests, and lifestyle to match you with the therapy that best suits your condition. A good therapist will listen to your needs and determine whether you need lighter or heavier pressure and overall or targeted massage. Many people trust that a male therapist is more reliable than a female therapist and assume that they’ll receive a deeper massage, but this isn’t true. Many female therapists know how to use their weight and have the right technique to carry out these massage therapies. 68/83 CHAPTER 14 Use Your Emotional Intelligence to Increase Happiness Emotional intelligence (EQ) can be described as a person’s ability to be aware of and control emotions in any situation and express them accordingly. Although people may suggest that EQ is something you’re either born with or not, experts suggest otherwise. They believe that it can be learned, improved upon, or “upgraded.” There are two aspects to EQ: “intrapersonal” and “interpersonal.” Intrapersonal intelligence works according to one’s own emotions, while interpersonal intelligence works according to others’ feelings. Some of the benefits that come with EQ are: - Career success. A person with EQ has strong motivation and can thrive in different situations, such as managing, leading, and working as a team. - Good relationships, both personally and professionally. - Personal development and growth. The essential requirement for this is that the individual must learn to understand, respect, and accept themselves. This will then enable them to focus outwards, to help other people also progress. - Happiness and confidence. This is what’s needed for you to excel in life. Once a person learns to control and manage their emotions and not depend on other people to make them happy, they increase their confidence and learn to stay satisfied on their own terms. There are countless ways to improve your EQ and, therefore, increase your happiness. These include: 1. Understanding and recognizing who you are. In other words, getting to know your personality. People often take multiple tests to check their EQ, the most common being the Big 5 Personality Test. The test is based on five personality traits that can be easily remembered as “OCEAN:” Openness to Experience: How open a person is to new experiences and adventures. How creative can the person be in different situations? Conscientiousness: How a person is in their daily life organization; how methodical, reliable, prompt, and thorough. Extraversion: This represents individual social disposition, whether an individual is an introvert, extrovert, or ambivert. Introverts often enjoy solitude, while extroverts are more social. A reasonable compromise between the two streams is referred to as ambivert. Agreeableness: How friendly, cooperative, and compassionate someone is. Neuroticism: How much control a person has over their emotions, especially negative ones; otherwise known as emotional stability. Once individuals understand all of these traits and how they rank in each of them, they can start to work on their EQ and take advantage of it more effectively. They’ll get better at managing themselves and be able to enjoy better relationships with other people. Knowing and tracking a person’s personality traits is helpful, but an individual must also efficiently understand and work with their strengths and weaknesses. Strengths can be classified as follows: Knowledge/wisdom: The creativity someone has when it comes to generating ideas and the ability to be curious and interested. The person has sound judgment. They’re open to learning new things and respect and try to understand the perspectives of others. Courage: The person remains brave in certain situations and can persevere and not lose motivation. They’re honest about what they say and what they do. Humanity: An individual’s strength can lie in their love for society. They engage in friendly interactions, can socialize effectively, and have empathy and compassion for others. They’ve strong social intelligence. Justice: The individual has a sense of fairness. They can work in a team and bring out the best in each of its members. They’re honest and act with integrity. Temperance: Moderation is essential. A person will be patient and have a balanced approach to life. They’re able to forgive and forget and to regulate themselves when necessary. Transcendence: The person realizes, appreciates, and is grateful for the small things. They remain 69/83 hopeful in situations of despair, humorous in mundane ones, and seek spirituality where necessary. All of these traits, when fed adequately, are strengths that can lead to happiness for an individual. 2. Define your values ​and beliefs. These will vary from person to person. We all have different ways of thinking and seeing the world. We don’t all value the same things or have matching needs. Each individual has a different and unique set of values and beliefs. So, it makes no sense to try to live by someone else’s values, beliefs, or goals. Recognize your own, and strive to live by them. We can look at people as having two types of values: means values ​and end values. Means values are a way to get you where you want to be in life and how you want to feel. End values ​are the goals that a person wants to achieve-what they think gives their life purpose and meaning. We need to realize that life is a journey with potholes, delays, cancellations, and failures. With EQ, we’re able to adapt and evolve to what life throws at us. Our means values, therefore, may need to change now and then. Next, establishing your beliefs. While there are many philosophies and theories about what someone should believe in, there’s no hard-and-fast rulebook to stick to. A person can choose what they find is closest to their way of thinking, morally, spiritually, and ethically, and act on it. For example, a person may believe in optimism-the ability to look at the positive side of things. The person shouldn’t only believe in this value themselves, but also try to get others to think the same way- without forcing it on them. A person’s actions should be inspiring enough for other people to follow them. 3. Listen to yourself. EQ allows us to recognize when our body is sending us signals that “something’s up.” This could be a tense body, talking internally, feeling stressed, or being emotionally exhausted. These signals are difficult to identify if someone isn’t in tune with their emotional intelligence. At the extreme end of not listening to yourself or your body: sometimes, a person can go blank while doing something and not handle even normal functions. This is known as ”Amygdala Hijack.” One solution suggested by therapists is practicing self-awareness. Some techniques are recommended: The individual must analyze what led to the hijacking; that is, what activated their brain in this way. For example, when a person gets angry, they should identify what caused their anger. Were they provoked, ignored, misunderstood? Once the individual recognizes their triggers, they can deal with the situation more effectively if it arises again. The person should practice taking breaks when the situation returns. For example, taking a “time out” and walking away. Practicing this habit can help the individual achieve a calm and composed reactive character. Once the individual has gone through the process more than once, they can create scenarios in their head and work through the scene effectively. It’s like planning how to deal with a tricky situation. If the individual continues to practice mindfulness in such scenarios, they can deal with them more productively. These strategies can be used to manage problems such as anger, stress, and other bad habits. For example, suppose someone is suffering from addiction. In that case, they must first recognize that it’s a bad habit, identify its causes or triggers, and then take the necessary steps to make themselves better. 4. Make peace with your past. From birth, we’ve been exposed to countless experiences and emotions. These can evoke both joyful and sad memories. What’s clear is that over the years, they’ve led to building our consciousness. It’s sometimes difficult to “return” to your past, but you need to heal before you can move on. Thinking about your journey, experiences, and relationships will allow you to learn more about yourself. It’ll show what you could’ve done differently, what others could’ve done differently-but realizing, at the same time, that you can’t go back and change things. For example, you may have had a difficult childhood, and the idea of thinking about it, of revisiting the past is too painful. But you can learn from it, reconcile yourself with it, and move on. You can apply valuable lessons from it, allowing it to shape a better future for yourself and others. 5. Learning about, and dealing with, your emotions. The first thing a person needs to do is identify their emotions, i.e., examine what they feel in specific scenarios-does a particular situation cause pleasure or comfort; what types of people or situations trigger you? You can label your emotions based on what you feel. By identifying what you think, you can respond to it 70/83 effectively and act accordingly. In other words, you’ll be able to manage, or deal with, your emotions. Some of the benefits are: Self-control; less likely to give in to anger. Less stress. Knowing how to act appropriately in social scenarios. Self-confidence and self-assurance. A better understanding of others’ emotions. Able to cope better with fear or anxiety. Recognizing your emotions and then dealing with them is a technique that’s developed over time. It may take a while, but it’s vital to keep at it. Avoiding emotions isn’t recommended, as it can lead to other harmful behavior such as addiction or self-harm. We need to get to the root of our feelings and not ignore them. If expressing emotion doesn’t hurt anyone, showing it can be helpful. It might show people that you need help or support. There are many different healthy outlets for negative emotions. Some people deal with disturbing emotions by writing letters and then burning them, for example. Focusing on the following will help keep negativity at bay: Self-care; looking after yourself through therapy, pampering, hobbies, or spending quality time alone. Removing toxic people from your life and indulging in healthy relationships. Working on yourself to develop trust. Managing your time and energy more effectively. This will help reduce stress and increase productivity. Practicing mindfulness and training your mind. 6. Listen to others You need to actively listen to other people and try to understand their perspective. If you claim that you already know everything, you’re sadly mistaken. You’ll quickly realize this as soon as you start to listen and gather the perspective of others. You’ll learn just how limited your knowledge actually is. You must try to expand your knowledge, and for that, you must listen to others and objectively observe everything around you. It’s essential to listen to what other people think of you, too. You can’t change other people’s perceptions of you; however, you can benefit from knowing what they think your strengths and weaknesses are. Taking comments and criticism is a sign of emotional intelligence; it’ll help you learn and grow. It’ll enable you to make better decisions and to take other people’s opinions (which might be of more use than your own) into consideration. 7. Improve your communication skills. Effective communication involves the use of two types of skills, namely verbal and nonverbal. Different techniques can be used to improve these. Verbal communication can be enhanced by including the following in your daily routine:  Instead of arguing, listen to what other people have to say about specific topics. It’ll help you to develop perspective.  Make your conversations a “safe space” in which you and others can share your experiences without fear of judgment or negativity. Share your vulnerability. This’ll help develop trusting bonds with others.  Instead of going into technical details that other people may not understand, explain things simply and concisely so that people will stay engaged and interested.  Keep a friendly, open, interested, engaged, and non-judgmental manner while talking to others. If you want to improve your nonverbal communication, you can practice the following techniques:  Be aware of your gestures, facial expressions, and body language, and how they can affect the other person.  Maintain good eye contact (but don’t stare people down!).  Maintain a good posture to show confidence.  Try to mirror some of the other person’s gestures; it’ll create a sense of empathy. In all your interactions, remember to be: - Honest, but not critical or judgmental - Open 71/83 - Pleasant but assertive - Friendly The main question here is: how can you be honest while being emotionally intelligent? Some people claim to be 100% honest because they “speak their mind.” But they’re speaking without caring about other people’s opinions or feelings. And some people have a tendency to lie. Both categories show a lack of EQ. Emotionally intelligent people know what to say and when to say it. They speak in a friendly, non-aggressive way. Being open to opinions and agreeing with other people means listening to other people and appreciating their perspectives. This also means acknowledging when you’re wrong. All of these things considerations improve your communication skills and social interactions. Finally, regardless of the means of communication, it must be done with love, care, and attention to the other person’s point of view. Only then can the conversation lead to a successful, mutually satisfactory end. What makes someone emotionally intelligent? The following are components of EQ that an individual can learn and develop:  Self-regulation  Self-awareness  Motivation  Empathy  Social Skills Self-regulation This refers to an individual’s ability to regulate their thoughts, emotions, and impulses and act accordingly. Self-regulation means that the individual: Must be in control of themselves; their actions and behavior affect those around them. Should try to maintain integrity in their actions. Must be able to adapt to new ideas and environments to work effectively. Must be creative and comfortable with new ideas. Must be organized and efficient in their dealings. Self-awareness Self-awareness is knowing yourself objectively, being aware of your shortcomings and strengths, and how your behavior impacts others. Self-awareness can be gained by taking into account the following factors: The individual must be able to objectively recognize their strengths and weaknesses and act accordingly in different situations. Individuals should be able to assess themselves in different situations and point out their shortcomings. The individual must be emotionally aware. The individual must have self-confidence and self-worth. Motivation Motivation is the reason for doing something, the willingness to do that thing, the ability to stay involved, and staying optimistic. Some factors involved in staying motivated may include: The individual should strive to achieve their goals with full commitment. The individual must take the initiative to propose solutions and remain optimistic throughout the process. The individual should be open to change and learning new things. Empathy Empathy means the ability to understand what other people are feeling and thinking. It not only involves actively listening to the other person but also understanding their perspective. Empathy includes putting yourself in other people’s shoes, accepting people as they are, and trying to form an organization with diversity. Social skills Social skills can have multiple characteristics, such as effective communication, conflict management, and leadership. All of these components, when processed effectively, can improve a person’s emotional intelligence. An individual’s emotional intelligence can be developed over the years and can be improved through various tips and techniques. Stimulating emotional intelligence not only helps a person thrive in their own life but can improve the lives of people around them. A person who can recognize, understand, and manage their own emotions is more capable of living a happy, meaningful, and prosperous life. 72/83 Q# 1: Why is it called “Dark” Psychology? FAQs ABOUT DARK PSYCHOLOGY The psychologist Michael Nuccitelli (2006) describes Dark Psychology as “both a human consciousness construct and study of the human condition as it relates to the psychological nature of people to prey upon others motivated by psychopathic, deviant or psychopathological criminal drives that lack purpose and general assumptions of instinctual drives, evolutionary biology, and social sciences theory. All of humanity has the potentiality to victimize humans and other living creatures. While many restrain or sublimate this tendency, some act upon these impulses. Dark Psychology explores criminal, deviant, and cybercriminal minds.” In other words, this branch of psychology studies the dark side of how and why people can misuse psychological tactics to get their way. People’s intentions can be good or bad, but manipulative tactics are usually unethical and harmful to society because you abuse and take advantage of someone’s kindness. Manipulation can also be conscious or unconscious, meaning that some people don’t even know that they’re manipulating the people around them. Q# 2: Can manipulation be used if it’s wrong? Dark psychological tactics, such as manipulation and coercion, are considered harmful. After all, nobody likes to be manipulated. The word “manipulation” has many negative connotations, whether in the workplace, the home, or other social spheres. It means that people can urge us to do something against our better judgment. It can support different types of criminal activity, such as fraud. And it can leave more vulnerable sections of society, such as the elderly or mentally ill, open to mistreatment. However, manipulation doesn’t always have to be for the wrong reasons. Manipulation consists of two types: persuasion and coercion. Persuasion means trying to convince and motivate someone to do something they want to do but are hesitant or unsure. On the other hand, coercion is about making people do things they don’t want to do. Technically, coercion is wrong, and persuasion is right. However, this varies from situation to situation; whether something someone wants to do is right for them or not, or what they don’t want to do is bad for them. Over time, people have faced many different problems for which they needed professional help, now more than ever because of our fast-paced economic lifestyle. To address these issues, people talk to therapists or psychologists for help, and these professionals use effective measures to improve patients’ lives. It’s a form of manipulation, but it’s for the person’s greater good and mental well- being. Another way manipulation can be used is to get your friends and family to do good things that you know are good for society as a whole. An example would be that you know that your family have a bad habit of using plastic bottles and packaging and not recycling them. You know this isn’t sustainable and bad for the environment, and you want them to stop, but they won’t listen to you. So over time, you slowly start to manipulate your family into feeling guilty until they’re conditioned to do the right thing. Technically this is manipulation. But your intentions are good, as you’re doing it to get your family to become better people and help save the environment. Q# 3: Where’s the Dark Psychology tactic of coercion practically used? In an ideal world, you ask someone to do something for you, and they’ll do it. But life isn’t perfect, and it doesn’t always work that way. People daily will often use “dark” psychological tactics to convince people to get things done. Certain professions also use these methods. One of these fields is sales and marketing. Many vendors are so focused on ensuring that the customer buys something that they often use dark manipulation tactics to motivate and convince them to buy their company’s product. Likewise, marketing companies use this tactic of persuasion to attract people to buy their products. While arguable, some famous economists and philosophers have shown their great disdain for marketing and classified it as highly unethical. They believe that marketing convinces desperate people to buy things they don’t need to survive, and therefore promotes unnecessary consumerism, and, in some cases, leads people into debt. This is an interesting debate that can be saved for another time. The tactics of Dark Psychology are also used by the police to solve cases and catch criminals, to ensure peace, safety, security, and prosperity within their jurisdictions. They use such strategies to extract information from witnesses and friends and families of their suspects and manipulate their suspects during interrogation to admit their crimes. 73/83 Moreover, these police officers and investigative officers are fully trained to read people’s behavior and body language, which allows them to get answers without the suspect saying anything at all. Q # 4: How does analyzing people’s behavior and reading body language relate to Dark Psychology? One of the essential parts of convincing and manipulating in Dark Psychology tactics is understanding the person you want to manage by analyzing their behavior. In other words, you should be able to read their body language. Studies show that about 20% of communication between people is through spoken words. So, what about the remaining 80%? That’s all body language and nonverbal cues. What i s body language? It’s the nonverbal signals other people display, enabling you to “read them like an open book.” Wikipedia defines body language as a “type of nonverbal communication in which physical behaviors, as opposed to words, are used to express or convey the information. Such behaviors include facial expressions, body posture, gestures, eye movement, touch, and the use of space.” It’s safe to say that most people aren’t aware of their body language most of the time. Without realizing it, everyone on this planet is sending out signals. Suppose you can learn to tune into those signals’ frequency and pay attention to the small details that emerge. In that case, you’ll not only understand the other person and their behavior but also be able to manipulate them-if you want. If you learn how to analyze a person’s signals, you’ll be able to see not only what most (including that person) can’t see but also understand what they think precisely. You’ll be able to read and even change thoughts if you want. That’s how people use Dark Psychology. Now the question is, how do you read behavior, people, and even ideas? I’ve already said that you have to tap into a specific frequency; in other words, carefully observe their movements and attitudes, and, as some psychologists put it, “read” them, but how does it all come together? Well, it’s already been proven that the mind and the body are each other’s mirrors and are directly connected. Whatever someone thinks or feels, their body will somehow transmit it. You need to connect your intuition to your intellectual capabilities, i.e., your understanding. When interviewed, an FBI agent said that one doesn’t have to be an excellent interrogator to determine what goes on in someone’s head. She even shared her nine main secrets of reading people: 1. Discover the baseline personality; 2. Look for deviations from that baseline; 3. Pay attention to clusters of behavioral abnormalities; 4. Compare the variances from the baseline; 5. Understand whether or not actions are answered; 6. 7. Observe people’s walk; 8. Recognize the type of words they use to describe actions; and 9. Understand their personality traits. Identify the loud voice; Now let’s look at this in detail. Every day, there are times when people exhibit random, strange behavior. When these behaviors come to light, you realize that “Yes, there’s something wrong here,” but you don’t know exactly what or why. The realization is your intuition telling you that something strange is going on, the “gut feeling” you have now and then. Understanding comes into play when you want to know what your intuition is telling you and why. Let’s look at an example. A boy sneaks out of the house one night to go to a party with some of his friends. The next morning, his mother asks him why he hadn’t slept. She’d heard a little commotion coming from his room when she’d got up to go to the bathroom. At about that time, the boy had sneaked back into the house after the party. Of course, he couldn’t tell his mother that. So he said to her that he was studying all night for a test. As he told this lie, the boy scratched his head. At first glance, this behavior could merely indicate that he’d got a sudden itch. But, depending on the context, it can also be a sign of dishonesty or deception. With these little gestures, parents can skillfully figure out when their kids are lying to them. They know your usual “baseline” behavior. Baseline behavior is the one that’s constant and is your own standard. It makes it easier to spot small changes in how you act or respond when someone else knows your baseline behavior. So if you ever deviate from your baseline behavior, their intuition tells them something is wrong, and it makes them realize you’re lying. This doesn’t only apply to deception; it applies to other scenarios, too. For example, a boy often sniffs with his nose when nervous. At first glance, it seems like the boy’s got a cold or runny nose, but the truth is that this little gesture that most people would ignore means the boy is nervous. One way to read body language is to continually observe someone until you find out how they behave under different conditions. Another way to understand a person is through voice. When you meet a group of people, pay attention to the one with 74/83 a strong, firm voice. This person is most likely to be the most influential. Theirs is most probably a self-assured personality. It’s essential to make a distinction between an influential voice and a “booming” one. Just because someone is loud doesn’t mean they’re the leader of the group. The leader may have a soft voice, but he would be assured, direct, and inspire confidence. A person’s voice largely determines their personality and whether or not they’re easy to manipulate. Someone with a strong voice is likely to have a dynamic, sturdy, confident personality or character. Someone who speaks more softly, more quietly, or hesitantly may be more meek and passive. As we can see, to understand someone through their body language means focusing on more than one aspect. Another thing to look at is the way someone moves. Every person moves differently, and that style reflects more than one realizes. Of course, there may be exceptions, but in most cases, a person’s level of confidence, attitude, and character can be revealed in this way. A steady, purposeful walking style, where a person looks like they need to be somewhere important, suggests a strong character. People with more timid personalities will tend to pause or take slow, aimless steps. Or someone may charge forward, making extra-long and quick steps, making them seem rushed and hurried, suggesting an anxious mind. Although not really body language, in that it’s part of verbal communication, the words someone uses when they speak reveal their character, values, beliefs, etc. If you listen carefully, you can identify which words “let slip” little bits about their personality. Over time, you can also understand which words you can use to get that person to do what you want. Confident words demonstrate a confident personality, and the opposite would be the case if the person made statements like, “I think,” “I guess so,” or “I don’t know.” With these words, it seems the person isn’t in control of their life and is always spinning instead of just being concise and straightforward. Such people are more prone to falling victim to dark psychological tactics simply because they let things happen to them rather than taking control. Another example: a regional manager who says at a meeting, ”I decided to get things done.” The word “decided” shows that she hasn’t only made a decision but has also thought a lot about it and knows how to take the situation into her own hands. Likewise, the way a person behaves also depends on what their birth order is. There are four categories: oldest, youngest, middle, and only child. The oldest child tends to form jealous rivalry when they start to lose their parents ’ attention because of their younger sibling. It ultimately could lead to a jealous and insecure character. The youngest competes for attention with the oldest and always wants to get his way. The youngest child’s personality is usually that of a risk taker because they feel they can do what they want. The middle child often becomes very arrogant. They get the least attention at home, so they take it out in other ways. An only child is more sensitive to criticism, and they tend to develop attention-seeking habits. By knowing a person’s birth order, you can easily bypass their specific personality traits to get what you want. Tuning in to the frequency of body language and basic human psychology will tell you so much about a person-more than they even realize. Because even they’ve no idea why they behave in a certain way. To accurately use dark psychological methods, it’s essential to understand people’s behavior. 75/83 CONCLUSION In general, it’s essential to remember how easy it is to fall under the influence of dark psychological tactics and perhaps even use such tactics to get what we want. It’s crucial to know and recognize the art of manipulation and persuasion to ensure that no one uses it on you. It’s also vital to understand it, so you don’t use it on other people. You should be able to know when to stop if you find yourself employing its tactics. Even if you want to manipulate someone for a good cause, you should avoid it because it means you’re misleading them and violating their confidence. If you think your position is correct and should be followed, try to convince the other person honestly how to change certain aspects of their behavior. They shouldn’t just be led to blindly accept what you say. Women, in particular, quickly fall victim to the tactics of Dark Psychology. Therefore, they need to be well aware of their environment, what’s going on around them, and what the men are saying and doing in their lives. They need to understand baseline behavior and how and when it’s being deviated from. Dark psychology is a vast and informative field because it focuses on humanity’s negativities and wrong side, which not many other areas do. It helps us understand why men and women manipulate their friends, family, colleagues, and others. However, as mentioned earlier, one should never use such tactics, even if the intention is correct. The only time such methods are considered ethical is when there’s a “win-win” situation for both parties. For this, you need to be honest with yourself in analyzing the case and believe that what you’re doing is also beneficial to the other person. If it’s only for your benefit, you can fall into and become addicted to doing wrong and unethical practices quite quickly. 76/83 THANK YOU! Before you go, we’d like to say thank you for purchasing our book. You could have picked from dozens of books on habit development, but you took a chance and checked out this one. So, big thanks for downloading this book and reading all the way to the end. Now we’d like to ask for a small favor. Could you please take a minute or two and leave a review for this book on Amazon? This feedback will help us continue to write the kind of Kindle books that help you get results. And if you loved it, please let us know. 77/83 MORE BOOKS BY KATE DAVIS The next book in the series is Book 1 - Emotional Intelligence Immagine che contiene testo Descrizione generata automaticamente 78/83 Book 2 - How To Analyze People Immagine che contiene testo, celenterato, medusa Descrizione generata automaticamente 79/83 Book 3 - Anger Management Immagine che contiene testo, libro Descrizione generata automaticamente 80/83 Book 4 - Understanding and Using Mental Models Immagine che contiene testo, libro Descrizione generata automaticamente 81/83 Book 5 Emotional Intelligence 2.0 Immagine che contiene testo Descrizione generata automaticamente 82/83 ABOUT KATE DAVIS Born and raised in Los Angeles, Kate Davis has been fascinated by hypnosis and mind control since her early childhood. This interest has led her down the path of studying many factors affecting human interactions. She's a prolific writer, NLP Practitioner, and hypnotist. In her books, she aims to reveal all the secrets behind hypnosis, influencing people, and manipulating the unconscious. Kate continually works on expanding her knowledge by attending seminars and networking with other professionals. When she is not busy researching or writing self-development eBooks, you will find her enjoying the outdoors, strolling on the beaches of Santa Monica. 83/83