target,input_feature
techniques,"name: Abuse Elevation Control Mechanism | description: Adversaries may circumvent mechanisms designed to control elevated privileges to gain higher-level permissions. Most modern systems contain native elevation control mechanisms that are intended to limit privileges that a user can gain on a machine. Authorization has to be granted to specific users in order to perform tasks that are designated as higher risk. An adversary can use several methods to take advantage of built-in control mechanisms in order to escalate privileges on a system. | tactics: Privilege Escalation | detection: When an application requests administrator permission, users are presented with a popup and the option to grant or deny the request. Application vetting services can detect when an application requests administrator permission. Extra scrutiny could be applied to applications that do | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Access Notifications | description: Adversaries may collect data within notifications sent by the operating system or other applications. Notifications may contain sensitive data such as one-time authentication codes sent over SMS, email, or other mediums. In the case of Credential Access, adversaries may attempt to intercept one-time code sent to the device. Adversaries can also dismiss notifications to prevent the user from noticing that the notification has arrived and can trigger action buttons contained within notifications.(Citation: ESET 2FA Bypass) | tactics: Collection, Credential Access | detection: Application vetting services can look for applications requesting the `BIND_NOTIFICATION_LISTENER_SERVICE` permission in a service declaration. Users can also inspect and modify the list of applications that have notification access through the device settings (e.g. Apps & notification -> Special app access -> Notification access). | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Account Access Removal | description: Adversaries may interrupt availability of system and network resources by inhibiting access to accounts utilized by legitimate users. Accounts may be deleted, locked, or manipulated (ex: credentials changed) to remove access to accounts. | tactics: Impact | detection: Application vetting services could closely scrutinize applications that request Device Administrator permissions. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Adversary-in-the-Middle | description: Adversaries may attempt to position themselves between two or more networked devices to support follow-on behaviors such as [Transmitted Data Manipulation](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1565/002) or [Endpoint Denial of Service](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1642).       [Adversary-in-the-Middle](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1638) can be achieved through several mechanisms. For example, a malicious application may register itself as a VPN client, effectively redirecting device traffic to adversary-owned resources. Registering as a VPN client requires user consent on both Android and iOS; additionally, a special entitlement granted by Apple is needed for iOS devices. Alternatively, a malicious application with escalation privileges may utilize those privileges to gain access to network traffic.       Specific to Android devices, adversary-in-the-disk is a type of AiTM attack where adversaries monitor and manipulate data that is exchanged between applications and external storage.(Citation: mitd_kaspersky)(Citation: mitd_checkpoint)(Citation: mitd_checkpoint_research) To accomplish this, a malicious application firsts requests for access to multimedia files on the device (`READ_EXTERNAL STORAGE` and `WRITE_EXTERNAL_STORAGE`), then the application reads data on the device and/or writes malware to the device. Though the request for access is common, when used maliciously, adversaries may access files and other sensitive data due to abusing the permission. Multiple applications were shown to be vulnerable against this attack; however, scrutiny of permissions and input validations may mitigate this attack.      Outside of a mobile device, adversaries may be able to capture traffic by employing a rogue base station or Wi-Fi access point. These devices will allow adversaries to capture network traffic after it has left the device, while it is flowing to its destination. On a local network, enterprise techniques could be used, such as [ARP Cache Poisoning](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1557/002) or [DHCP Spoofing](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1557/003).       If applications properly encrypt their network traffic, sensitive data may not be accessible to adversaries, depending on the point of capture. For example, properly implementing Apple’s Application Transport Security (ATS) and Android’s Network Security Configuration (NSC) may prevent sensitive data leaks.(Citation: NSC_Android) | tactics: Collection | detection: Application vetting services should look for applications that request VPN access. These applications should be heavily scrutinized since VPN functionality is not very common. Mobile security products can potentially detect rogue Wi-Fi access points if the adversary is attempting to decrypt traffic using an untrusted SSL certificate.      On both Android and iOS, users must grant consent to an application to act as a VPN. Both platforms also provide visual context to the user in the top status bar when a VPN connection is active. Users can see registered VPN services in the device settings. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Application Layer Protocol | description: Adversaries may communicate using application layer protocols to avoid detection/network filtering by blending in with existing traffic. Commands to the mobile device, and often the results of those commands, will be embedded within the protocol traffic between the mobile device and server.   Adversaries may utilize many different protocols, including those used for web browsing, transferring files, electronic mail, or DNS. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Abuse of standard application protocols can be difficult to detect as many legitimate mobile applications leverage such protocols for language-specific APIs. Enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Application Versioning | description: An adversary may push an update to a previously benign application to add malicious code. This can be accomplished by pushing an initially benign, functional application to a trusted application store, such as the Google Play Store or the Apple App Store. This allows the adversary to establish a trusted userbase that may grant permissions to the application prior to the introduction of malicious code. Then, an application update could be pushed to introduce malicious code.(Citation: android_app_breaking_bad)  This technique could also be accomplished by compromising a developer’s account. This would allow an adversary to take advantage of an existing userbase without having to establish the userbase themselves. | tactics: Defense Evasion, Initial Access | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Adam Lichters; Edward Stevens, BT Security"
techniques,"name: Archive Collected Data | description: Adversaries may compress and/or encrypt data that is collected prior to exfiltration. Compressing data can help to obfuscate its contents and minimize use of network resources. Encryption can be used to hide information that is being exfiltrated from detection or make exfiltration less conspicuous upon inspection by a defender.      Both compression and encryption are done prior to exfiltration, and can be performed using a utility, programming library, or custom algorithm. | tactics: Collection | detection: Many encryption mechanisms are built into standard application-accessible APIs and are therefore undetectable to the end user. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Asymmetric Cryptography | description: Adversaries may employ a known asymmetric encryption algorithm to conceal command and control traffic, rather than relying on any inherent protections provided by a communication protocol. Asymmetric cryptography, also known as public key cryptography, uses a keypair per party: one public that can be freely distributed, and one private that should not be distributed. Due to how asymmetric algorithms work, the sender encrypts data with the receiver’s public key and the receiver decrypts the data with their private key. This ensures that only the intended recipient can read the encrypted data. Common public key encryption algorithms include RSA, ElGamal, and ECDSA.  For efficiency, many protocols (including SSL/TLS) use symmetric cryptography once a connection is established, but use asymmetric cryptography to establish or transmit a key. As such, these protocols are classified as [Asymmetric Cryptography](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1521/002). | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Since data encryption is a common practice in many legitimate applications and uses standard programming language-specific APIs, encrypting data for command and control communication is regarded as undetectable to the user. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Audio Capture | description: Adversaries may capture audio to collect information by leveraging standard operating system APIs of a mobile device. Examples of audio information adversaries may target include user conversations, surroundings, phone calls, or other sensitive information.      Android and iOS, by default, require that applications request device microphone access from the user.       On Android devices, applications must hold the `RECORD_AUDIO` permission to access the microphone or the `CAPTURE_AUDIO_OUTPUT` permission to access audio output. Because Android does not allow third-party applications to hold the `CAPTURE_AUDIO_OUTPUT` permission by default, only privileged applications, such as those distributed by Google or the device vendor, can access audio output.(Citation: Android Permissions) However, adversaries may be able to gain this access after successfully elevating their privileges. With the `CAPTURE_AUDIO_OUTPUT` permission, adversaries may pass the `MediaRecorder.AudioSource.VOICE_CALL` constant to `MediaRecorder.setAudioOutput`, allowing capture of both voice call uplink and downlink.(Citation: Manifest.permission)      On iOS devices, applications must include the `NSMicrophoneUsageDescription` key in their `Info.plist` file to access the microphone.(Citation: Requesting Auth-Media Capture) | tactics: Collection | detection: In iOS 14 and up, an orange dot (or orange square if the Differentiate Without Color setting is enabled) appears in the status bar when the microphone is being used by an application. However, there have been demonstrations indicating it may still be possible to access the microphone in the background without triggering this visual indicator by abusing features that natively access the microphone or camera but do not trigger the visual indicators.(Citation: iOS Mic Spyware)   In Android 12 and up, a green dot appears in the status bar when the microphone is being used by an application.(Citation: Android Privacy Indicators)    Android applications using the `RECORD_AUDIO` permission and iOS applications using `RequestRecordPermission` should be carefully reviewed and monitored. If the `CAPTURE_AUDIO_OUTPUT` permission is found in a third-party Android application, the application should be heavily scrutinized.      In both Android (6.0 and up) and iOS, users can review which applications have the permission to access the microphone through the device settings screen and revoke permissions as necessary. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Bidirectional Communication | description: Adversaries may use an existing, legitimate external Web service channel as a means for sending commands to and receiving output from a compromised system. Compromised systems may leverage popular websites and social media to host command and control (C2) instructions. Those infected systems can then send the output from those commands back over that Web service channel. The return traffic may occur in a variety of ways, depending on the Web service being utilized. For example, the return traffic may take the form of the compromised system posting a comment on a forum, issuing a pull request to development project, updating a document hosted on a Web service, or by sending a Tweet.      Popular websites and social media, acting as a mechanism for C2, may give a significant amount of cover. This is due to the likelihood that hosts within a network are already communicating with them prior to a compromise. Using common services, such as those offered by Google or Twitter, makes it easier for adversaries to hide in expected noise. Web service providers commonly use SSL/TLS encryption, giving adversaries an added level of protection. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Application vetting services may provide a list of connections made or received by an application, or a list of domains contacted by the application. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Boot or Logon Initialization Scripts | description: Adversaries may use scripts automatically executed at boot or logon initialization to establish persistence. Initialization scripts are part of the underlying operating system and are not accessible to the user unless the device has been rooted or jailbroken. | tactics: Persistence | detection: On Android, Verified Boot can detect unauthorized modifications to the system partition.(Citation: Android-VerifiedBoot) Android's SafetyNet API provides remote attestation capabilities, which could potentially be used to identify and respond to compromise devices. Samsung Knox provides a similar remote attestation capability on supported Samsung devices. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Broadcast Receivers | description: Adversaries may establish persistence using system mechanisms that trigger execution based on specific events. Mobile operating systems have means to subscribe to events such as receiving an SMS message, device boot completion, or other device activities.   An intent is a message passed between Android applications or system components. Applications can register to receive broadcast intents at runtime, which are system-wide intents delivered to each app when certain events happen on the device, such as network changes or the user unlocking the screen. Malicious applications can then trigger certain actions within the app based on which broadcast intent was received.   In addition to Android system intents, malicious applications can register for intents broadcasted by other applications. This allows the malware to respond based on actions in other applications. This behavior typically indicates a more intimate knowledge, or potentially the targeting of specific devices, users, or applications.   In Android 8 (API level 26), broadcast intent behavior was changed, limiting the implicit intents that applications can register for in the manifest. In most cases, applications that register through the manifest will no longer receive the broadcasts. Now, applications must register context-specific broadcast receivers while the user is actively using the app.(Citation: Android Changes to System Broadcasts) | tactics: Persistence | detection: Application vetting services can detect which broadcast intents an application registers for and which permissions it requests. | platforms: Android | contributors: Alex Hinchliffe, Palo Alto Networks"
techniques,"name: Calendar Entries | description: Adversaries may utilize standard operating system APIs to gather calendar entry data. On Android, this can be accomplished using the Calendar Content Provider. On iOS, this can be accomplished using the `EventKit` framework.      If the device has been jailbroken or rooted, an adversary may be able to access [Calendar Entries](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1636/001) without the user’s knowledge or approval. | tactics: Collection | detection: On both Android and iOS, the user can manage which applications have permission to access calendar information through the device settings screen, revoke the permission if necessary. Application vetting services could look for `android.permission.READ_CALENDAR` or `android.permission.WRITE_CALENDAR` in an Android application’s manifest, or `NSCalendarsUsageDescription` in an iOS application’s `Info.plist` file. Most applications do not need calendar access, so extra scrutiny could be applied to those that request it. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Call Control | description: Adversaries may make, forward, or block phone calls without user authorization. This could be used for adversary goals such as audio surveillance, blocking or forwarding calls from the device owner, or C2 communication.  Several permissions may be used to programmatically control phone calls, including:  * `ANSWER_PHONE_CALLS` - Allows the application to answer incoming phone calls(Citation: Android Permissions) * `CALL_PHONE` - Allows the application to initiate a phone call without going through the Dialer interface(Citation: Android Permissions) * `PROCESS_OUTGOING_CALLS` - Allows the application to see the number being dialed during an outgoing call with the option to redirect the call to a different number or abort the call altogether(Citation: Android Permissions) * `MANAGE_OWN_CALLS` - Allows a calling application which manages its own calls through the self-managed `ConnectionService` APIs(Citation: Android Permissions) * `BIND_TELECOM_CONNECTION_SERVICE` - Required permission when using a `ConnectionService`(Citation: Android Permissions) * `WRITE_CALL_LOG` - Allows an application to write to the device call log, potentially to hide malicious phone calls(Citation: Android Permissions)  When granted some of these permissions, an application can make a phone call without opening the dialer first. However, if an application desires to simply redirect the user to the dialer with a phone number filled in, it can launch an Intent using `Intent.ACTION_DIAL`, which requires no specific permissions. This then requires the user to explicitly initiate the call or use some form of [Input Injection](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1516) to programmatically initiate it. | tactics: Collection, Command and Control, Impact | detection: Users can view their default phone app in device settings. Users can review available call logs for irregularities, such as missing or unrecognized calls. | platforms: Android | contributors: Gaetan van Diemen, ThreatFabric"
techniques,"name: Call Log | description: Adversaries may utilize standard operating system APIs to gather call log data. On Android, this can be accomplished using the Call Log Content Provider. iOS provides no standard API to access the call log.      If the device has been jailbroken or rooted, an adversary may be able to access the [Call Log](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1636/002) without the user’s knowledge or approval. | tactics: Collection | detection: On Android, the user can manage which applications have permission to access the call log through the device settings screen, revoking the permission if necessary. Application vetting services could look for `android.permission.READ_CALL_LOG` in an Android application’s manifest. Most applications do not need call log access, so extra scrutiny could be applied to those that request it. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Clipboard Data | description: Adversaries may abuse clipboard manager APIs to obtain sensitive information copied to the device clipboard. For example, passwords being copied and pasted from a password manager application could be captured by a malicious application installed on the device.(Citation: Fahl-Clipboard)      On Android, applications can use the `ClipboardManager.OnPrimaryClipChangedListener()` API to register as a listener and monitor the clipboard for changes. However, starting in Android 10, this can only be used if the application is in the foreground, or is set as the device’s default input method editor (IME).(Citation: Github Capture Clipboard 2019)(Citation: Android 10 Privacy Changes)      On iOS, this can be accomplished by accessing the `UIPasteboard.general.string` field. However, starting in iOS 14, upon accessing the clipboard, the user will be shown a system notification if the accessed text originated in a different application. For example, if the user copies the text of an iMessage from the Messages application, the notification will read “application_name has pasted from Messages” when the text was pasted in a different application.(Citation: UIPPasteboard) | tactics: Collection, Credential Access | detection: Application vetting services could detect usage of standard clipboard APIs. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Code Signing Policy Modification | description: Adversaries may modify code signing policies to enable execution of applications signed with unofficial or unknown keys. Code signing provides a level of authenticity on an app from a developer, guaranteeing that the program has not been tampered with and comes from an official source. Security controls can include enforcement mechanisms to ensure that only valid, signed code can be run on a device.   Mobile devices generally enable these security controls by default, such as preventing the installation of unknown applications on Android. Adversaries may modify these policies in a number of ways, including [Input Injection](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1516) or malicious configuration profiles. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: On Android, the user can use the device settings menu to view trusted CA certificates and look for unexpected or unknown certificates. A mobile security product could similarly examine the trusted CA certificate store for anomalies. Users can use the device settings menu to view which applications on the device are allowed to install unknown applications.  On iOS, the user can use the device settings menu to view installed Configuration Profiles and look for unexpected or unknown profiles. A Mobile Device Management (MDM) system could use the iOS MDM APIs to examine the list of installed Configuration Profiles for anomalies. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Command and Scripting Interpreter | description: Adversaries may abuse command and script interpreters to execute commands, scripts, or binaries. These interfaces and languages provide ways of interacting with computer systems and are a common feature across many different platforms. Most systems come with some built-in command-line interface and scripting capabilities, for example, Android is a UNIX-like OS and includes a basic [Unix Shell](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1623/001) that can be accessed via the Android Debug Bridge (ADB) or Java’s `Runtime` package.  Adversaries may abuse these technologies in various ways as a means of executing arbitrary commands. Commands and scripts can be embedded in [Initial Access](https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/TA0027) payloads delivered to victims as lure documents or as secondary payloads downloaded from an existing C2. Adversaries may also execute commands through interactive terminals/shells. | tactics: Execution | detection: Command-line activities can potentially be detected through Mobile Threat Defense integrations with lower-level OS APIs. This could grant the MTD agents access to running processes and their parameters, potentially detecting unwanted or malicious shells.  Application vetting services could detect the invocations of methods that could be used to execute shell commands.(Citation: Samsung Knox Mobile Threat Defense) | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Compromise Application Executable | description: Adversaries may modify applications installed on a device to establish persistent access to a victim. These malicious modifications can be used to make legitimate applications carry out adversary tasks when these applications are in use.  There are multiple ways an adversary can inject malicious code into applications. One method is by taking advantages of device vulnerabilities, the most well-known being Janus, an Android vulnerability that allows adversaries to add extra bytes to APK (application) and DEX (executable) files without affecting the file's signature. By being able to add arbitrary bytes to valid applications, attackers can seamlessly inject code into genuine executables without the user's knowledge.(Citation: Guardsquare Janus)  Adversaries may also rebuild applications to include malicious modifications. This can be achieved by decompiling the genuine application, merging it with the malicious code, and recompiling it.(Citation: CheckPoint Agent Smith)  Adversaries may also take action to conceal modifications to application executables and bypass user consent. These actions include altering modifications to appear as an update or exploiting vulnerabilities that allow activities of the malicious application to run inside a system application.(Citation: CheckPoint Agent Smith) | tactics: Persistence | detection: This behavior is seamless to the user and is typically undetectable. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Compromise Client Software Binary | description: Adversaries may modify system software binaries to establish persistent access to devices. System software binaries are used by the underlying operating system and users over adb or terminal emulators.   Adversaries may make modifications to client software binaries to carry out malicious tasks when those binaries are executed. For example, malware may come with a pre-compiled malicious binary intended to overwrite the genuine one on the device. Since these binaries may be routinely executed by the system or user, the adversary can leverage this for persistent access to the device. | tactics: Persistence | detection: Verified Boot can detect unauthorized modifications to the system partition.(Citation: Android-VerifiedBoot) Android’s SafetyNet API provides remote attestation capabilities, which could potentially be used to identify and respond to compromised devices. Samsung Knox provides a similar remote attestation capability on supported Samsung devices. Application vetting services could detect applications trying to modify files in protected parts of the operating system. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Compromise Hardware Supply Chain | description: Adversaries may manipulate hardware components in products prior to receipt by a final consumer for the purpose of data or system compromise. By modifying hardware or firmware in the supply chain, adversaries can insert a backdoor into consumer networks that may be difficult to detect and give the adversary a high degree of control over the system. | tactics: Initial Access | detection: Integrity checking mechanisms can potentially detect unauthorized hardware modifications. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Compromise Software Dependencies and Development Tools | description: Adversaries may manipulate products or product delivery mechanisms prior to receipt by a final consumer for the purpose of data or system compromise. Applications often depend on external software to function properly. Popular open source projects that are used as dependencies in many applications may be targeted as a means to add malicious code to users of the dependency.(Citation: Grace-Advertisement) | tactics: Initial Access | detection: Usage of insecure or malicious third-party libraries could be detected by application vetting services. Malicious software development tools could be detected by enterprises that deploy endpoint protection software on computers that are used to develop mobile apps. Application vetting could detect the usage of insecure or malicious third-party libraries. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Compromise Software Supply Chain | description: Adversaries may manipulate application software prior to receipt by a final consumer for the purpose of data or system compromise. Supply chain compromise of software can take place in a number of ways, including manipulation of the application source code, manipulation of the update/distribution mechanism for that software, or replacing compiled releases with a modified version. | tactics: Initial Access | detection: Application vetting services can detect malicious code in applications. System partition integrity checking mechanisms can detect unauthorized or malicious code contained in the system partition. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Conceal Multimedia Files | description: Adversaries may attempt to hide multimedia files from the user. By doing so, adversaries may conceal captured files, such as pictures, videos and/or screenshots, then later exfiltrate those files.    Specific to Android devices, if the `.nomedia` file is present in a folder, multimedia files in that folder will not be visible to the user in the Gallery application. Additionally, other applications are asked not to scan the folder with the `.nomedia` file, effectively making the folder appear invisible to the user.    This technique is often used by stalkerware and spyware applications. | tactics: Defense Evasion | platforms: Android | contributors: Shankar Raman, Amrita University, Gen Digital, Traboda"
techniques,"name: Contact List | description: Adversaries may utilize standard operating system APIs to gather contact list data. On Android, this can be accomplished using the Contacts Content Provider. On iOS, this can be accomplished using the `Contacts` framework.      If the device has been jailbroken or rooted, an adversary may be able to access the [Contact List](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1636/003) without the user’s knowledge or approval. | tactics: Collection | detection: On both Android and iOS, the user can manage which applications have permission to access the contact list through the device settings screen, revoking the permission if necessary. Application vetting services could look for `android.permission.READ_CONTACTS` in an Android application’s manifest, or `NSContactsUsageDescription` in an iOS application’s `Info.plist` file. Most applications do not need contact list access, so extra scrutiny could be applied to those that request it. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Credentials from Password Store | description: Adversaries may search common password storage locations to obtain user credentials. Passwords can be stored in several places on a device, depending on the operating system or application holding the credentials. There are also specific applications that store passwords to make it easier for users to manage and maintain. Once credentials are obtained, they can be used to perform lateral movement and access restricted information. | tactics: Credential Access | detection: Mobile security products can potentially detect jailbroken devices. Application vetting services may be able to detect known privilege escalation exploits contained within applications, as well as searching application packages for strings that correlate to known password store locations. | platforms: iOS"
techniques,"name: Data Destruction | description: Adversaries may destroy data and files on specific devices or in large numbers to interrupt availability to systems, services, and network resources. Data destruction is likely to render stored data irrecoverable by forensic techniques through overwriting files or data on local and remote drives.    To achieve data destruction, adversaries may use the `pm uninstall` command to uninstall packages or the `rm` command to remove specific files. For example, adversaries may first use `pm uninstall` to uninstall non-system apps, and then use `rm (-f) <file(s)>` to delete specific files, further hiding malicious activity.(Citation: rootnik_rooting_tool)(Citation: abuse_native_linux_tools) | tactics: Impact | platforms: Android | contributors: Liran Ravich, CardinalOps"
techniques,"name: Data Encrypted for Impact | description: An adversary may encrypt files stored on a mobile device to prevent the user from accessing them. This may be done in order to extract monetary compensation from a victim in exchange for decryption or a decryption key (ransomware) or to render data permanently inaccessible in cases where the key is not saved or transmitted. | tactics: Impact | detection: Application vetting services may be able to detect if an application attempts to encrypt files, although this may be benign behavior. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Data Manipulation | description: Adversaries may insert, delete, or alter data in order to manipulate external outcomes or hide activity. By manipulating data, adversaries may attempt to affect a business process, organizational understanding, or decision making.  The type of modification and the impact it will have depends on the target application, process, and the goals and objectives of the adversary. For complex systems, an adversary would likely need special expertise and possibly access to specialized software related to the system, typically gained through a prolonged information gathering campaign, in order to have the desired impact. | tactics: Impact | detection: Application vetting services could look for use of standard APIs (e.g. the clipboard API) that could indicate data manipulation is occurring. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Data from Local System | description: Adversaries may search local system sources, such as file systems or local databases, to find files of interest and sensitive data prior to exfiltration.       Access to local system data, which includes information stored by the operating system, often requires escalated privileges. Examples of local system data include authentication tokens, the device keyboard cache, Wi-Fi passwords, and photos. On Android, adversaries may also attempt to access files from external storage which may require additional storage-related permissions. | tactics: Collection | detection: Accessing data from the local system can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Dead Drop Resolver | description: Adversaries may use an existing, legitimate external Web service to host information that points to additional command and control (C2) infrastructure. Adversaries may post content, known as a dead drop resolver, on Web services with embedded (and often obfuscated/encoded) domains or IP addresses. Once infected, victims will reach out to and be redirected by these resolvers.      Popular websites and social media, acting as a mechanism for C2, may give a significant amount of cover. This is due to the likelihood that hosts within a network are already communicating with them prior to a compromise. Using common services, such as those offered by Google or Twitter, makes it easier for adversaries to hide in expected noise. Web service providers commonly use SSL/TLS encryption, giving adversaries an added level of protection.      Use of a dead drop resolver may also protect back-end C2 infrastructure from discovery through malware binary analysis, or enable operational resiliency (since this infrastructure may be dynamically changed). | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Application vetting services may provide a list of connections made or received by an application, or a list of domains contacted by the application. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Device Administrator Permissions | description: Adversaries may abuse Android’s device administration API to obtain a higher degree of control over the device. By abusing the API, adversaries can perform several nefarious actions, such as resetting the device’s password for [Endpoint Denial of Service](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1642), factory resetting the device for [File Deletion](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1630/002) and to delete any traces of the malware, disabling all the device’s cameras, or to make it more difficult to uninstall the app.  Device administrators must be approved by the user at runtime, with a system popup showing which actions have been requested by the app. In conjunction with other techniques, such as [Input Injection](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1516), an app can programmatically grant itself administrator permissions without any user input. | tactics: Privilege Escalation | detection: Users are prompted for approval when an application requests device administrator permissions. Users can see which applications are registered as device administrators in the device settings. Application vetting services can check for the string `BIND_DEVICE_ADMIN` in the application’s manifest. This indicates it can prompt the user for device administrator permissions. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Device Lockout | description: An adversary may seek to inhibit user interaction by locking the legitimate user out of the device. This is typically accomplished by requesting device administrator permissions and then locking the screen using `DevicePolicyManager.lockNow()`. Other novel techniques for locking the user out of the device have been observed, such as showing a persistent overlay, using carefully crafted “call” notification screens, and locking HTML pages in the foreground. These techniques can be very difficult to get around, and typically require booting the device into safe mode to uninstall the malware.(Citation: Microsoft MalLockerB)(Citation: Talos GPlayed)(Citation: securelist rotexy 2018)  Prior to Android 7, device administrators were able to reset the device lock passcode to prevent the user from unlocking the device. The release of Android 7 introduced updates that only allow device or profile owners (e.g. MDMs) to reset the device’s passcode.(Citation: Android resetPassword) | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Users can view a list of device administrators in device settings and revoke permission where appropriate. Applications that request device administrator permissions should be scrutinized further for malicious behavior. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Disable or Modify Tools | description: Adversaries may disable security tools to avoid potential detection of their tools and activities. This can take the form of disabling security software, modifying SELinux configuration, or other methods to interfere with security tools scanning or reporting information. This is typically done by abusing device administrator permissions or using system exploits to gain root access to the device to modify protected system files. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Users can view a list of active device administrators in the device settings. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Disguise Root/Jailbreak Indicators | description: An adversary could use knowledge of the techniques used by security software to evade detection.(Citation: Brodie)(Citation: Tan) For example, some mobile security products perform compromised device detection by searching for particular artifacts such as an installed ""su"" binary, but that check could be evaded by naming the binary something else. Similarly, polymorphic code techniques could be used to evade signature-based detection.(Citation: Rastogi) | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Mobile security products can use attestation to detect compromised devices. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Domain Generation Algorithms | description: Adversaries may use [Domain Generation Algorithms](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1637/001) (DGAs) to procedurally generate domain names for uses such as command and control communication   or malicious application distribution.(Citation: securelist rotexy 2018)  DGAs increase the difficulty for defenders to block, track, or take over the command and control channel, as there could potentially be thousands of domains that malware can check for instructions. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Detecting dynamically generated domains can be challenging due to the number of different DGA algorithms, constantly evolving malware families, and the increasing complexity of the algorithms. There are a myriad of approaches for detecting a pseudo-randomly generated domain name, including using frequency analysis, Markov chains, entropy, proportion of dictionary words, ratio of vowels to other characters, and more.(Citation: Data Driven Security DGA) CDN domains may trigger these detections due to the format of their domain names. In addition to detecting a DGA domain based on the name, a more general approach for detecting a suspicious domain is to check for recently registered names | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Download New Code at Runtime | description: Adversaries may download and execute dynamic code not included in the original application package after installation. This technique is primarily used to evade static analysis checks and pre-publication scans in official app stores. In some cases, more advanced dynamic or behavioral analysis techniques could detect this behavior. However, in conjunction with [Execution Guardrails](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1627) techniques, detecting malicious code downloaded after installation could be difficult.  On Android, dynamic code could include native code, Dalvik code, or JavaScript code that utilizes Android WebView’s `JavascriptInterface` capability.   On iOS, dynamic code could be downloaded and executed through 3rd party libraries such as JSPatch. (Citation: FireEye-JSPatch) | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Existing network infrastructure may detect network calls to known malicious domains or the transfer of malicious payloads over the network. Mobile security products may provide URL inspection services that could determine if a domain being visited is malicious. Application vetting services could look for indications that the application downloads and executes new code at runtime (e.g., on Android, use of `DexClassLoader`, `System.load`, or the WebView `JavaScriptInterface` capability; on iOS, use of JSPatch or similar capabilities). Unfortunately, this is only a partial mitigation, as additional scrutiny would still need to be applied to applications that use these techniques. These techniques are often used without malicious intent, and  applications may employ other techniques to hide their use of these techniques. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Drive-By Compromise | description: Adversaries may gain access to a system through a user visiting a website over the normal course of browsing. With this technique, the user's web browser is typically targeted for exploitation, but adversaries may also use compromised websites for non-exploitation behavior such as acquiring an [Application Access Token](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1550/001).  Multiple ways of delivering exploit code to a browser exist, including:  * A legitimate website is compromised where adversaries have injected some form of malicious code such as JavaScript, iFrames, and cross-site scripting. * Malicious ads are paid for and served through legitimate ad providers. * Built-in web application interfaces are leveraged for the insertion of any other kind of object that can be used to display web content or contain a script that executes on the visiting client (e.g. forum posts, comments, and other user controllable web content).  Often the website used by an adversary is one visited by a specific community, such as government, a particular industry, or region, where the goal is to compromise a specific user or set of users based on a shared interest. This kind of targeted attack is referred to a strategic web compromise or watering hole attack. There are several known examples of this occurring.(Citation: Lookout-StealthMango)  Typical drive-by compromise process:  1. A user visits a website that is used to host the adversary controlled content. 2. Scripts automatically execute, typically searching versions of the browser and plugins for a potentially vulnerable version.      * The user may be required to assist in this process by enabling scripting or active website components and ignoring warning dialog boxes. 3. Upon finding a vulnerable version, exploit code is delivered to the browser. 4. If exploitation is successful, then it will give the adversary code execution on the user's system unless other protections are in place.     * In some cases a second visit to the website after the initial scan is required before exploit code is delivered. | tactics: Initial Access | detection: Mobile security products can often alert the user if their device is vulnerable to known exploits. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Dynamic Resolution | description: Adversaries may dynamically establish connections to command and control infrastructure to evade common detections and remediations. This may be achieved by using malware that shares a common algorithm with the infrastructure the adversary uses to receive the malware's communications. This algorithm can be used to dynamically adjust parameters such as the domain name, IP address, or port number the malware uses for command and control. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Detecting dynamically generated domains can be challenging due to the number of different Domain Generation Algorithms (DGAs), constantly evolving malware families, and the increasing complexity of the algorithms. There are a myriad of approaches for detecting a pseudo-randomly generated domain name, including using frequency analysis, Markov chains, entropy, proportion of dictionary words, ratio of vowels to other characters, and more.(Citation: Data Driven Security DGA) Content delivery network (CDN) domains may trigger these detections due to the format of their domain names. In addition to detecting a DGA domain based on the name, a more general approach for detecting a suspicious domain is to check for recently registered names or rarely visited domains. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Encrypted Channel | description: Adversaries may explicitly employ a known encryption algorithm to conceal command and control traffic rather than relying on any inherent protections provided by a communication protocol. Despite the use of a secure algorithm, these implementations may be vulnerable to reverse engineering if necessary secret keys are encoded and/or generated within malware samples/configuration files. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Since data encryption is a common practice in many legitimate applications and uses standard programming language-specific APIs, encrypting data for command and control communication is regarded as undetectable to the user. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Endpoint Denial of Service | description: Adversaries may perform Endpoint Denial of Service (DoS) attacks to degrade or block the availability of services to users.  On Android versions prior to 7, apps can abuse Device Administrator access to reset the device lock passcode, preventing the user from unlocking the device. After Android 7, only device or profile owners (e.g. MDMs) can reset the device’s passcode.(Citation: Android resetPassword)  On iOS devices, this technique does not work because mobile device management servers can only remove the screen lock passcode; they cannot set a new passcode. However, on jailbroken devices, malware has been discovered that can lock the user out of the device.(Citation: Xiao-KeyRaider) | tactics: Impact | detection: On Android, users can review which applications have Device Administrator access in the device settings and revoke permission where appropriate. Application vetting services can detect and closely scrutinize applications that utilize Device Administrator access. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Event Triggered Execution | description: Adversaries may establish persistence using system mechanisms that trigger execution based on specific events. Mobile operating systems have means to subscribe to events such as receiving an SMS message, device boot completion, or other device activities.   Adversaries may abuse these mechanisms as a means of maintaining persistent access to a victim via automatically and repeatedly executing malicious code. After gaining access to a victim’s system, adversaries may create or modify event triggers to point to malicious content that will be executed whenever the event trigger is invoked. | tactics: Persistence | detection: Application vetting services can detect which broadcast intents an application registers for and which permissions it requests. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Execution Guardrails | description: Adversaries may use execution guardrails to constrain execution or actions based on adversary supplied and environment specific conditions that are expected to be present on the target. Guardrails ensure that a payload only executes against an intended target and reduces collateral damage from an adversary’s campaign. Values an adversary can provide about a target system or environment to use as guardrails may include environment information such as location.(Citation: SWB Exodus March 2019)  Guardrails can be used to prevent exposure of capabilities in environments that are not intended to be compromised or operated within. This use of guardrails is distinct from typical [System Checks](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1633/001). While use of [System Checks](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1633/001) may involve checking for known sandbox values and continuing with execution only if there is no match, the use of guardrails will involve checking for an expected target-specific value and only continuing with execution if there is such a match. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Detecting the use of guardrails may be difficult depending on the implementation. Users can review which applications have location and sensitive phone information permissions in the operating system’s settings menu. Application vetting services can detect unnecessary and potentially permissions or API calls. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Exfiltration Over Alternative Protocol | description: Adversaries may steal data by exfiltrating it over a different protocol than that of the existing command and control channel. The data may also be sent to an alternate network location from the main command and control server.   Alternate protocols include FTP, SMTP, HTTP/S, DNS, SMB, or any other network protocol not being used as the main command and control channel. Different protocol channels could also include Web services such as cloud storage. Adversaries may opt to also encrypt and/or obfuscate these alternate channels. | tactics: Exfiltration | detection: [Exfiltration Over Alternative Protocol](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1639)s can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Exfiltration Over C2 Channel | description: Adversaries may steal data by exfiltrating it over an existing command and control channel. Stolen data is encoded into the normal communications channel using the same protocol as command and control communications. | tactics: Exfiltration | detection: [Exfiltration Over C2 Channel](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1646) can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Exfiltration Over Unencrypted Non-C2 Protocol | description: Adversaries may steal data by exfiltrating it over an un-encrypted network protocol other than that of the existing command and control channel. The data may also be sent to an alternate network location from the main command and control server.  Adversaries may opt to obfuscate this data, without the use of encryption, within network protocols that are natively unencrypted (such as HTTP, FTP, or DNS). Adversaries may employ custom or publicly available encoding/compression algorithms (such as base64) or embed data within protocol headers and fields. | tactics: Exfiltration | detection: [Exfiltration Over Unencrypted Non-C2 Protocol](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1639/001)s can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Exploitation for Client Execution | description: Adversaries may exploit software vulnerabilities in client applications to execute code. Vulnerabilities can exist in software due to insecure coding practices that can lead to unanticipated behavior. Adversaries may take advantage of certain vulnerabilities through targeted exploitation for the purpose of arbitrary code execution. Oftentimes the most valuable exploits to an offensive toolkit are those that can be used to obtain code execution on a remote system because they can be used to gain access to that system. Users will expect to see files related to the applications they commonly used to do work, so they are a useful target for exploit research and development because of their high utility.   Adversaries may use device-based zero-click exploits for code execution. These exploits are powerful because there is no user interaction required for code execution.   ### SMS/iMessage Delivery    SMS and iMessage in iOS are common targets through [Drive-By Compromise](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1456), [Phishing](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1660), etc. Adversaries may use embed malicious links, files, etc. in SMS messages or iMessages. Mobile devices may be compromised through one-click exploits, where the victim must interact with a text message, or zero-click exploits, where no user interaction is required.   ### AirDrop   Unique to iOS, AirDrop is a network protocol that allows iOS users to transfer files between iOS devices. Before patches from Apple were released, on iOS 13.4 and earlier, adversaries may force the Apple Wireless Direct Link (AWDL) interface to activate, then exploit a buffer overflow to gain access to the device and run as root without interaction from the user. | tactics: Execution | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Giorgi Gurgenidze, ISAC"
techniques,"name: Exploitation for Initial Access | description: Adversaries may exploit software vulnerabilities to gain initial access to a mobile device.   This can be accomplished in a variety of ways. Vulnerabilities may be present in the applications, the services, the underlying operating system, or the kernel itself. Several well-known mobile device exploits exist, including FORCEDENTRY, StageFright, and BlueBorne. Furthermore, some exploits may be possible to exploit without any user interaction (i.e. zero-click exploits, see [Exploitation for Client Execution](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1658)), making them particularly dangerous. Mobile operating system vendors are typically very quick to patch such critical bugs, ensuring only a small window where they can be exploited. | tactics: Initial Access | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Exploitation for Privilege Escalation | description: Adversaries may exploit software vulnerabilities in order to elevate privileges. Exploitation of a software vulnerability occurs when an adversary takes advantage of a programming error in an application, service, within the operating system software, or kernel itself to execute adversary-controlled code. Security constructions, such as permission levels, will often hinder access to information and use of certain techniques. Adversaries will likely need to perform privilege escalation to include use of software exploitation to circumvent those restrictions.   When initially gaining access to a device, an adversary may be operating within a lower privileged process which will prevent them from accessing certain resources on the system. Vulnerabilities may exist, usually in operating system components and applications running at higher permissions, that can be exploited to gain higher levels of access on the system. This could enable someone to move from unprivileged or user- level permission to root permissions depending on the component that is vulnerable. | tactics: Privilege Escalation | detection: Mobile security products can potentially utilize device APIs to determine if a device has been rooted or jailbroken.  Application vetting services could potentially determine if an application contains code designed to exploit vulnerabilities. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Exploitation of Remote Services | description: Adversaries may exploit remote services of enterprise servers, workstations, or other resources to gain unauthorized access to internal systems once inside of a network. Adversaries may exploit remote services by taking advantage of a mobile device’s access to an internal enterprise network through local connectivity or through a Virtual Private Network (VPN). Exploitation of a software vulnerability occurs when an adversary takes advantage of a programming error in a program, service, or within the operating system software or kernel itself to execute adversary-controlled code. A common goal for post-compromise exploitation of remote services is for lateral movement to enable access to a remote system.   An adversary may need to determine if the remote system is in a vulnerable state, which may be done through [Network Service Scanning](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1423) or other Discovery methods. These look for common, vulnerable software that may be deployed in the network, the lack of certain patches that may indicate vulnerabilities, or security software that may be used to detect or contain remote exploitation. Servers are likely a high value target for lateral movement exploitation, but endpoint systems may also be at risk if they provide an advantage or access to additional resources.  Depending on the permissions level of the vulnerable remote service, an adversary may achieve [Exploitation for Privilege Escalation](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1404) as a result of lateral movement exploitation as well. | tactics: Lateral Movement | detection: Detecting software exploitation initiated by a mobile device may be difficult depending on the tools available. Software exploits may not always succeed or may cause the exploited process to become unstable or crash.  Network traffic analysis could reveal patterns of compromise if devices attempt to access unusual targets or resources.   Application vetting may be able to identify applications that perform Discovery or utilize existing connectivity to remotely access hosts within an internal enterprise network. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: File Deletion | description: Adversaries may wipe a device or delete individual files in order to manipulate external outcomes or hide activity. An application must have administrator access to fully wipe the device, while individual files may not require special permissions to delete depending on their storage location.(Citation: Android DevicePolicyManager 2019)   Stored data could include a variety of file formats, such as Office files, databases, stored emails, and custom file formats. The impact file deletion will have depends on the type of data as well as the goals and objectives of the adversary, but can include deleting update files to evade detection or deleting attacker-specified files for impact. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Mobile security products can detect which applications can request device administrator permissions. Users can view applications with administrator access through the device settings, and may also notice if user data is inexplicably missing. Application vetting services could be extra scrutinous of applications that request device administrator permissions. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: File and Directory Discovery | description: Adversaries may enumerate files and directories or search in specific device locations for desired information within a filesystem. Adversaries may use the information from [File and Directory Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1420) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors, including deciding if the adversary should fully infect the target and/or attempt specific actions.   On Android, Linux file permissions and SELinux policies typically stringently restrict what can be accessed by apps without taking advantage of a privilege escalation exploit. The contents of the external storage directory are generally visible, which could present concerns if sensitive data is inappropriately stored there. iOS's security architecture generally restricts the ability to perform any type of [File and Directory Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1420) without use of escalated privileges. | tactics: Discovery | detection: On Android, users are presented with a permissions popup when an application requests access to external device storage. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Foreground Persistence | description: Adversaries may abuse Android's `startForeground()` API method to maintain continuous sensor access. Beginning in Android 9, idle applications running in the background no longer have access to device sensors, such as the camera, microphone, and gyroscope.(Citation: Android-SensorsOverview) Applications can retain sensor access by running in the foreground, using Android’s `startForeground()` API method. This informs the system that the user is actively interacting with the application, and it should not be killed. The only requirement to start a foreground service is showing a persistent notification to the user.(Citation: Android-ForegroundServices)  Malicious applications may abuse the `startForeground()` API method to continue running in the foreground, while presenting a notification to the user pretending to be a genuine application. This would allow unhindered access to the device’s sensors, assuming permission has been previously granted.(Citation: BlackHat Sutter Android Foreground 2019)  Malicious applications may also abuse the `startForeground()` API to inform the Android system that the user is actively interacting with the application, thus preventing it from being killed by the low memory killer.(Citation: TrendMicro-Yellow Camera) | tactics: Defense Evasion, Persistence | detection: Users can see persistent notifications in their notification drawer and can subsequently uninstall applications that do not belong. Applications could be vetted for their use of the `startForeground()` API, and could be further scrutinized if usage is found. | platforms: Android | contributors: Lorin Wu, Trend Micro"
techniques,"name: GUI Input Capture | description: Adversaries may mimic common operating system GUI components to prompt users for sensitive information with a seemingly legitimate prompt. The operating system and installed applications often have legitimate needs to prompt the user for sensitive information such as account credentials, bank account information, or Personally Identifiable Information (PII). Compared to traditional PCs, the constrained display size of mobile devices may impair the ability to provide users with contextual information, making users more susceptible to this technique’s use.(Citation: Felt-PhishingOnMobileDevices)  There are several approaches adversaries may use to mimic this functionality. Adversaries may impersonate the identity of a legitimate application (e.g. use the same application name and/or icon) and, when installed on the device, may prompt the user for sensitive information.(Citation: eset-finance) Adversaries may also send fake device notifications to the user that may trigger the display of an input prompt when clicked.(Citation: Group IB Gustuff Mar 2019)   Additionally, adversaries may display a prompt on top of a running, legitimate application to trick users into entering sensitive information into a malicious application rather than the legitimate application. Typically, adversaries need to know when the targeted application and the individual activity within the targeted application is running in the foreground to display the prompt at the proper time. Adversaries can abuse Android’s accessibility features to determine which application is currently in the foreground.(Citation: ThreatFabric Cerberus) Two known approaches to displaying a prompt include:  * Adversaries start a new activity on top of a running legitimate application.(Citation: Felt-PhishingOnMobileDevices)(Citation: Hassell-ExploitingAndroid) Android 10 places new restrictions on the ability for an application to start a new activity on top of another application, which may make it more difficult for adversaries to utilize this technique.(Citation: Android Background) * Adversaries create an application overlay window on top of a running legitimate application. Applications must hold the `SYSTEM_ALERT_WINDOW` permission to create overlay windows. This permission is handled differently than typical Android permissions and, at least under certain conditions, is automatically granted to applications installed from the Google Play Store.(Citation: Cloak and Dagger)(Citation: NowSecure Android Overlay)(Citation: Skycure-Accessibility) The `SYSTEM_ALERT_WINDOW` permission and its associated ability to create application overlay windows are expected to be deprecated in a future release of Android in favor of a new API.(Citation: XDA Bubbles) | tactics: Collection, Credential Access | detection: Android users can view and manage which applications hold the `SYSTEM_ALERT_WINDOW` permission through the device settings in Apps & notifications -> Special app access -> Display over other apps (the exact menu location may vary between Android versions).   Application vetting services can look for applications requesting the `android.permission.SYSTEM_ALERT_WINDOW` permission in the list of permissions in the app manifest. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Generate Traffic from Victim | description: Adversaries may generate outbound traffic from devices. This is typically performed to manipulate external outcomes, such as to achieve carrier billing fraud or to manipulate app store rankings or ratings. Outbound traffic is typically generated as SMS messages or general web traffic, but may take other forms as well.  If done via SMS messages, Android apps must hold the `SEND_SMS` permission. Additionally, sending an SMS message requires user consent if the recipient is a premium number. Applications cannot send SMS messages on iOS | tactics: Impact | detection: On Android, users can review which applications can use premium SMS features in the “Special access” page within application settings. Application vetting services can detect when applications request the `SEND_SMS` permission, which should be infrequently used. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Geofencing | description: Adversaries may use a device’s geographical location to limit certain malicious behaviors. For example, malware operators may limit the distribution of a second stage payload to certain geographic regions.(Citation: Lookout eSurv)  [Geofencing](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1627/001) is accomplished by persuading the user to grant the application permission to access location services. The application can then collect, process, and exfiltrate the device’s location to perform location-based actions, such as ceasing malicious behavior or showing region-specific advertisements.   One method to accomplish [Geofencing](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1627/001) on Android is to use the built-in Geofencing API to automatically trigger certain behaviors when the device enters or exits a specified radius around a geographical location. Similar to  other [Geofencing](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1627/001) methods, this requires that the user has granted the `ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION` and `ACCESS_BACKGROUND_LOCATION` permissions. The latter is only required if the application targets Android 10 (API level 29) or higher. However, Android 11 introduced additional permission controls that may restrict background location collection based on user permission choices at runtime. These additional controls include ""Allow only while using the app"", which will effectively prohibit background location collection.    Similarly, on iOS, developers can use built-in APIs to setup and execute geofencing. Depending on the use case, the app will either need to call `requestWhenInUseAuthorization()` or `requestAlwaysAuthorization()`, depending on when access to the location services is required. Similar to Android, users also have the option to limit when the application can access the device’s location, including one-time use and only when the application is running in the foreground.    [Geofencing](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1627/001) can be used to prevent exposure of capabilities in environments that are not intended to be compromised or operated within. For example, location data could be used to limit malware spread and/or capabilities, which could also potentially evade application analysis environments (ex: malware analysis outside of the target geographic area). Other malicious usages could include showing language-specific input prompts and/or advertisements. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Users can review which applications have location permissions in the operating system’s settings menu. On Android 10 and later, the system shows a notification to the user when an app has been accessing device location in the background. Application vetting services can detect unnecessary and potentially abused location permissions or API calls. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Hide Artifacts | description: Adversaries may attempt to hide artifacts associated with their behaviors to evade detection. Mobile operating systems have features and developer APIs to hide various artifacts, such as an application’s launcher icon. These APIs have legitimate usages, such as hiding an icon to avoid application drawer clutter when an application does not have a usable interface. Adversaries may abuse these features and APIs to hide artifacts from the user to evade detection. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: The user can examine the list of all installed applications in the device settings. Application vetting services could potentially detect the usage of APIs intended for artifact hiding. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Hijack Execution Flow | description: Adversaries may execute their own malicious payloads by hijacking the way operating systems run applications. Hijacking execution flow can be for the purposes of persistence since this hijacked execution may reoccur over time.   There are many ways an adversary may hijack the flow of execution. A primary way is by manipulating how the operating system locates programs to be executed. How the operating system locates libraries to be used by a program can also be intercepted. Locations where the operating system looks for programs or resources, such as file directories, could also be poisoned to include malicious payloads. | tactics: Persistence | detection: Mobile threat defense agents could detect unauthorized operating system modifications by using attestation. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Hooking | description: Adversaries may utilize hooking to hide the presence of artifacts associated with their behaviors to evade detection. Hooking can be used to modify return values or data structures of system APIs and function calls. This process typically involves using 3rd party root frameworks, such as Xposed or Magisk, with either a system exploit or pre-existing root access. By including custom modules for root frameworks, adversaries can hook system APIs and alter the return value and/or system data structures to alter functionality/visibility of various aspects of the system. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Hooking can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android | contributors: Jörg Abraham, EclecticIQ"
techniques,"name: Impair Defenses | description: Adversaries may maliciously modify components of a victim environment in order to hinder or disable defensive mechanisms. This not only involves impairing preventative defenses, such as anti-virus, but also detection capabilities that defenders can use to audit activity and identify malicious behavior. This may span both native defenses as well as supplemental capabilities installed by users or mobile endpoint administrators. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Mobile security products integrated with Samsung Knox for Mobile Threat Defense can monitor processes to see if security tools are killed or stop running. Application vetting can detect many techniques associated with impairing device defenses.(Citation: Samsung Knox Mobile Threat Defense) | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Impersonate SS7 Nodes | description: Adversaries may exploit the lack of authentication in signaling system network nodes to track the location of mobile devices by impersonating a node.(Citation: Engel-SS7)(Citation: Engel-SS7-2008)(Citation: 3GPP-Security)(Citation: Positive-SS7)(Citation: CSRIC5-WG10-FinalReport)      By providing the victim’s MSISDN (phone number) and impersonating network internal nodes to query subscriber information from other nodes, adversaries may use data collected from each hop to eventually determine the device’s geographical cell area or nearest cell tower.(Citation: Engel-SS7) | tactics: Collection, Discovery | detection: Network carriers may be able to use firewalls, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), or Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS) to detect and/or block SS7 exploitation.(Citation: CSRIC-WG1-FinalReport) The CSRIC also suggests threat information sharing between telecommunications industry members. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Indicator Removal on Host | description: Adversaries may delete, alter, or hide generated artifacts on a device, including files, jailbreak status, or the malicious application itself. These actions may interfere with event collection, reporting, or other notifications used to detect intrusion activity. This may compromise the integrity of mobile security solutions by causing notable events or information to go unreported. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Mobile security products can detect which applications can request device administrator permissions. Users can view applications with administrator access through the device settings, and may also notice if user data is inexplicably missing. Users can see a list of applications that can use accessibility services in the device settings. Application vetting services could look for use of APIs that could indicate the application is trying to hide activity. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Ingress Tool Transfer | description: Adversaries may transfer tools or other files from an external system onto a compromised device to facilitate follow-on actions. Files may be copied from an external adversary-controlled system through the command and control channel  or through alternate protocols with another tool such as FTP. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Application vetting services could look for connections to unknown domains or IP addresses. Application vetting services may indicate precisely what content was requested during application execution. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Input Capture | description: Adversaries may use methods of capturing user input to obtain credentials or collect information. During normal device usage, users often provide credentials to various locations, such as login pages/portals or system dialog boxes. Input capture mechanisms may be transparent to the user (e.g. [Keylogging](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1417/001)) or rely on deceiving the user into providing input into what they believe to be a genuine application prompt (e.g. [GUI Input Capture](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1417/002)). | tactics: Collection, Credential Access | detection: Application vetting services can look for applications requesting the permissions granting access to accessibility services or application overlay. Users can view and manage installed third-party keyboards. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Input Injection | description: A malicious application can inject input to the user interface to mimic user interaction through the abuse of Android's accessibility APIs.  [Input Injection](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1516) can be achieved using any of the following methods:  * Mimicking user clicks on the screen, for example to steal money from a user's PayPal account.(Citation: android-trojan-steals-paypal-2fa) * Injecting global actions, such as `GLOBAL_ACTION_BACK` (programatically mimicking a physical back button press), to trigger actions on behalf of the user.(Citation: Talos Gustuff Apr 2019) * Inserting input into text fields on behalf of the user. This method is used legitimately to auto-fill text fields by applications such as password managers.(Citation: bitwarden autofill logins) | tactics: Defense Evasion, Impact | detection: Users can view applications that have registered accessibility services in the accessibility menu within the device settings. | platforms: Android | contributors: Lukáš Štefanko, ESET"
techniques,"name: Internet Connection Discovery | description: Adversaries may check for Internet connectivity on compromised systems. This may be performed during automated discovery and can be accomplished in numerous ways such as using `adb shell netstat` for Android.(Citation: adb_commands)  Adversaries may use the results and responses from these requests to determine if the mobile devices are capable of communicating with adversary-owned C2 servers before attempting to connect to them. The results may also be used to identify routes, redirectors, and proxy servers. | tactics: Discovery | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Keychain | description: Adversaries may collect keychain data from an iOS device to acquire credentials. Keychains are the built-in way for iOS to keep track of users' passwords and credentials for many services and features such as Wi-Fi passwords, websites, secure notes, certificates, private keys, and VPN credentials.   On the device, the keychain database is stored outside of application sandboxes to prevent unauthorized access to the raw data. Standard iOS APIs allow applications access to their own keychain contained within the database. By utilizing a privilege escalation exploit or existing root access, adversaries can access the entire encrypted database.(Citation: Apple Keychain Services)(Citation: Elcomsoft Decrypt Keychain) | tactics: Credential Access | detection: Mobile security products can potentially detect jailbroken devices. Application vetting services may be able to detect known privilege escalation exploits contained within applications, as well as searching application packages for strings that correlate to known password store locations. | platforms: iOS"
techniques,"name: Keylogging | description: Adversaries may log user keystrokes to intercept credentials or other information from the user as the user types them.  Some methods of keylogging include:  * Masquerading as a legitimate third-party keyboard to record user keystrokes.(Citation: Zeltser-Keyboard) On both Android and iOS, users must explicitly authorize the use of third-party keyboard apps. Users should be advised to use extreme caution before granting this authorization when it is requested. * Abusing accessibility features. On Android, adversaries may abuse accessibility features to record keystrokes by registering an `AccessibilityService` class, overriding the `onAccessibilityEvent` method, and listening for the `AccessibilityEvent.TYPE_VIEW_TEXT_CHANGED` event type. The event object passed into the function will contain the data that the user typed.  *Additional methods of keylogging may be possible if root access is available. | tactics: Collection, Credential Access | detection: On Android, users can view and manage which applications have third-party keyboard access through the device settings in System -> Languages & input -> Virtual keyboard. On iOS, users can view and manage which applications have third-party keyboard access through the device settings in General -> Keyboard.   Application vetting services can look for applications requesting the `android.permission.BIND_ACCESSIBILITY_SERVICE` permission in a service declaration. On Android, users can view and manage which applications can use accessibility services through the device settings in Accessibility. The exact device settings menu locations may vary between operating system versions. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Location Tracking | description: Adversaries may track a device’s physical location through use of standard operating system APIs via malicious or exploited applications on the compromised device.      On Android, applications holding the `ACCESS_COAURSE_LOCATION` or `ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION` permissions provide access to the device’s physical location. On Android 10 and up, declaration of the `ACCESS_BACKGROUND_LOCATION` permission in an application’s manifest will allow applications to request location access even when the application is running in the background.(Citation: Android Request Location Permissions) Some adversaries have utilized integration of Baidu map services to retrieve geographical location once the location access permissions had been obtained.(Citation: PaloAlto-SpyDealer)(Citation: Palo Alto HenBox)      On iOS, applications must include the `NSLocationWhenInUseUsageDescription`, `NSLocationAlwaysAndWhenInUseUsageDescription`, and/or `NSLocationAlwaysUsageDescription` keys in their `Info.plist` file depending on the extent of requested access to location information.(Citation: Apple Requesting Authorization for Location Services) On iOS 8.0 and up, applications call `requestWhenInUseAuthorization()` to request access to location information when the application is in use or `requestAlwaysAuthorization()` to request access to location information regardless of whether the application is in use. With elevated privileges, an adversary may be able to access location data without explicit user consent with the `com.apple.locationd.preauthorized` entitlement key.(Citation: Google Project Zero Insomnia) | tactics: Collection, Discovery | detection: Android applications requesting the `ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION`, `ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION`, or `ACCESS_BACKGROUND_LOCATION` permissions and iOS applications including the `NSLocationWhenInUseUsageDescription`, `NSLocationAlwaysAndWhenInUseUsageDescription`, and/or `NSLocationAlwaysUsageDescription` keys in their `Info.plist` file could be scrutinized during the application vetting process.      In both Android (6.0 and up) and iOS, users can view which applications have the permission to access the device location through the device settings screen and revoke permissions as necessary. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Lockscreen Bypass | description: An adversary with physical access to a mobile device may seek to bypass the device’s lockscreen. Several methods exist to accomplish this, including:  * Biometric spoofing: If biometric authentication is used, an adversary could attempt to spoof a mobile device’s biometric authentication mechanism. Both iOS and Android partly mitigate this attack by requiring the device’s passcode rather than biometrics to unlock the device after every device restart, and after a set or random amount of time.(Citation: SRLabs-Fingerprint)(Citation: TheSun-FaceID) * Unlock code bypass: An adversary could attempt to brute-force or otherwise guess the lockscreen passcode (typically a PIN or password), including physically observing (“shoulder surfing”) the device owner’s use of the lockscreen passcode. Mobile OS vendors partly mitigate this by implementing incremental backoff timers after a set number of failed unlock attempts, as well as a configurable full device wipe after several failed unlock attempts. * Vulnerability exploit: Techniques have been periodically demonstrated that exploit mobile devices to bypass the lockscreen. The vulnerabilities are generally patched by the device or OS vendor once disclosed.(Citation: Wired-AndroidBypass)(Citation: Kaspersky-iOSBypass) | tactics: Initial Access | detection: Users can see if someone is watching them type in their device passcode. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Masquerading | description: Adversaries may attempt to manipulate features of their artifacts to make them appear legitimate or benign to users and/or security tools. Masquerading occurs when the name, location, or appearance of an object, legitimate or malicious, is manipulated or abused for the sake of evading defenses and observation. This may include manipulating file metadata, tricking users into misidentifying the file type, and giving legitimate task or service names.  Renaming abusable system utilities to evade security monitoring is also a form of [Masquerading](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1655) | tactics: Defense Evasion | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Match Legitimate Name or Location | description: Adversaries may match or approximate the name or location of legitimate files or resources when naming/placing them. This is done for the sake of evading defenses and observation. This may be done by giving artifacts the name and icon of a legitimate, trusted application (i.e., Settings), or using a package name that matches legitimate, trusted applications (i.e., `com.google.android.gm`).   Adversaries may also use the same icon of the file or application they are trying to mimic. | tactics: Defense Evasion | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Ford Qin, Trend Micro; Liran Ravich, CardinalOps"
techniques,"name: Native API | description: Adversaries may use Android’s Native Development Kit (NDK) to write native functions that can achieve execution of binaries or functions. Like system calls on a traditional desktop operating system, native code achieves execution on a lower level than normal Android SDK calls.  The NDK allows developers to write native code in C or C++ that is compiled directly to machine code, avoiding all intermediate languages and steps in compilation that higher level languages, like Java, typically have. The Java Native Interface (JNI) is the component that allows Java functions in the Android app to call functions in a native library.(Citation: Google NDK Getting Started)  Adversaries may also choose to use native functions to execute malicious code since native actions are typically much more difficult to analyze than standard, non-native behaviors.(Citation: MITRE App Vetting Effectiveness) | tactics: Defense Evasion, Execution | detection: This is abuse of standard OS-level APIs and are therefore typically undetectable to the end user. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Network Denial of Service | description: Adversaries may perform Network Denial of Service (DoS) attacks to degrade or block the availability of targeted resources to users. Network DoS can be performed by exhausting the network bandwidth that services rely on, or by jamming the signal going to or coming from devices.   A Network DoS will occur when an adversary is able to jam radio signals (e.g. Wi-Fi, cellular, GPS) around a device to prevent it from communicating. For example, to jam cellular signal, an adversary may use a handheld signal jammer, which jam devices within the jammer’s operational range.(Citation: NIST-SP800187)   Usage of cellular jamming has been documented in several arrests reported in the news.(Citation: CNET-Celljammer)(Citation: NYTimes-Celljam)(Citation: Digitaltrends-Celljam)(Citation: Arstechnica-Celljam) | tactics: Impact | detection: Unexpected loss of radio signal could indicate that a device is being actively jammed. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Network Service Scanning | description: Adversaries may attempt to get a listing of services running on remote hosts, including those that may be vulnerable to remote software exploitation. Methods to acquire this information include port scans and vulnerability scans from the mobile device. This technique may take advantage of the mobile device's access to an internal enterprise network either through local connectivity or through a Virtual Private Network (VPN). | tactics: Discovery | detection: Network service scanning can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Non-Standard Port | description: Adversaries may generate network traffic using a protocol and port pairing that are typically not associated. For example, HTTPS over port 8088 or port 587 as opposed to the traditional port 443. Adversaries may make changes to the standard port used by a protocol to bypass filtering or muddle analysis/parsing of network data. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Application vetting reports may show network communications performed by the application, including hosts, ports, protocols, and URLs. Further detection would most likely be at the enterprise level, through packet and/or netflow inspection. Many properly configured firewalls may also naturally block command and control traffic over non-standard ports. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Obfuscated Files or Information | description: Adversaries may attempt to make a payload or file difficult to discover or analyze by encrypting, encoding, or otherwise obfuscating its contents on the device or in transit. This is common behavior that can be used across different platforms and the network to evade defenses.    Payloads may be compressed, archived, or encrypted in order to avoid detection. These payloads may be used during Initial Access or later to mitigate detection. Portions of files can also be encoded to hide the plaintext strings that would otherwise help defenders with discovery. Payloads may also be split into separate, seemingly benign files that only reveal malicious functionality when reassembled.(Citation: Microsoft MalLockerB) | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Dynamic analysis, when used in application vetting, may in some cases be able to identify malicious code in obfuscated or encrypted form by detecting the code at execution time (after it is deobfuscated or decrypted). Some application vetting techniques apply reputation analysis of the application developer and can alert to potentially suspicious applications without actual examination of application code. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: One-Way Communication | description: Adversaries may use an existing, legitimate external Web service channel as a means for sending commands to a compromised system without receiving return output. Compromised systems may leverage popular websites and social media to host command and control (C2) instructions. Those infected systems may opt to send the output from those commands back over a different C2 channel, including to another distinct Web service. Alternatively, compromised systems may return no output at all in cases where adversaries want to send instructions to systems and do not want a response.      Popular websites and social media, acting as a mechanism for C2, may give a significant amount of cover. This is due to the likelihood that hosts within a network are already communicating with them prior to a compromise. Using common services, such as those offered by Google or Twitter, makes it easier for adversaries to hide in expected noise. Web service providers commonly use SSL/TLS encryption, giving adversaries an added level of protection. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Application vetting services may provide a list of connections made or received by an application, or a list of domains contacted by the application. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Out of Band Data | description: Adversaries may communicate with compromised devices using out of band data streams. This could be done for a variety of reasons, including evading network traffic monitoring, as a backup method of command and control, or for data exfiltration if the device is not connected to any Internet-providing networks (i.e. cellular or Wi-Fi). Several out of band data streams exist, such as SMS messages, NFC, and Bluetooth.      On Android, applications can read push notifications to capture content from SMS messages, or other out of band data streams. This requires that the user manually grant notification access to the application via the settings menu. However, the application could launch an Intent to take the user directly there.      On iOS, there is no way to programmatically read push notifications. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: If a user sees a notification with text they do not recognize, they should review their list of installed applications. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Phishing | description: Adversaries may send malicious content to users in order to gain access to their mobile devices. All forms of phishing are electronically delivered social engineering. Adversaries can conduct both non-targeted phishing, such as in mass malware spam campaigns, as well as more targeted phishing tailored for a specific individual, company, or industry, known as “spearphishing”.  Phishing often involves social engineering techniques, such as posing as a trusted source, as well as evasion techniques, such as removing or manipulating emails or metadata/headers from compromised accounts being abused to send messages.  Mobile phishing may take various forms. For example, adversaries may send emails containing malicious attachments or links, typically to deliver and then execute malicious code on victim devices. Phishing may also be conducted via third-party services, like social media platforms.    Mobile devices are a particularly attractive target for adversaries executing phishing campaigns.  Due to their smaller form factor than traditional desktop endpoints, users may not be able to notice minor differences between genuine and phishing websites. Further, mobile devices have additional sensors and radios that allow adversaries to execute phishing attempts over several different vectors, such as:   - SMS messages: Adversaries may send SMS messages (known as “smishing”) from compromised devices to potential targets to convince the target to, for example, install malware, navigate to a specific website, or enable certain insecure configurations on their device. - Quick Response (QR) Codes: Adversaries may use QR codes (known as “quishing”) to redirect users to a phishing website. For example, an adversary could replace a legitimate public QR Code with one that leads to a different destination, such as a phishing website. A malicious QR code could also be delivered via other means, such as SMS or email. In the latter case, an adversary could utilize a malicious QR code in an email to pivot from the user’s desktop computer to their mobile device. - Phone Calls: Adversaries may call victims (known as “vishing”) to persuade them to perform an action, such as providing login credentials or navigating to a malicious website. This could also be used as a technique to perform the initial access on a mobile device, but then pivot to a computer/other network by having the victim perform an action on a desktop computer. | tactics: Initial Access | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Adam Mashinchi; Brian Donohue; Naveen Devaraja, bolttech; Sam Seabrook, Duke Energy; Vijay Lalwani; Will Thomas, Equinix"
techniques,"name: Prevent Application Removal | description: Adversaries may abuse the Android device administration API to prevent the user from uninstalling a target application. In earlier versions of Android, device administrator applications needed their administration capabilities explicitly deactivated by the user before the application could be uninstalled. This was later updated so the user could deactivate and uninstall the administrator application in one step.  Adversaries may also abuse the device accessibility APIs to prevent removal. This set of APIs allows the application to perform certain actions on behalf of the user and programmatically determine what is being shown on the screen. The malicious application could monitor the device screen for certain modals (e.g., the confirmation modal to uninstall an application) and inject screen input or a back button tap to close the modal. For example, Android's `performGlobalAction(int)` API could be utilized to prevent the user from removing the malicious application from the device after installation. If the user wants to uninstall the malicious application, two cases may occur, both preventing the user from removing the application.  * Case 1: If the integer argument passed to the API call is `2` or `GLOBAL_ACTION_HOME`, the malicious application may direct the user to the home screen from settings screen   * Case 2: If the integer argument passed to the API call is `1` or `GLOBAL_ACTION_BACK`, the malicious application may emulate the back press event | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Users can view a list of device administrators and applications that have registered accessibility services in device settings. Users can typically visually see when an action happens that they did not initiate and can subsequently review installed applications for any out of place or unknown ones. Applications that register an accessibility service or request device administrator permissions should be scrutinized further for malicious behavior. | platforms: Android | contributors: Shankar Raman, Gen Digital and Abhinand, Amrita University"
techniques,"name: Process Discovery | description: Adversaries may attempt to get information about running processes on a device. Information obtained could be used to gain an understanding of common software/applications running on devices within a network. Adversaries may use the information from [Process Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1424) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors, including whether or not the adversary fully infects the target and/or attempts specific actions.      Recent Android security enhancements have made it more difficult to obtain a list of running processes. On Android 7 and later, there is no way for an application to obtain the process list without abusing elevated privileges. This is due to the Android kernel utilizing the `hidepid` mount feature. Prior to Android 7, applications could utilize the `ps` command or examine the `/proc` directory on the device.(Citation: Android-SELinuxChanges)      In iOS, applications have previously been able to use the `sysctl` command to obtain a list of running processes. This functionality has been removed in later iOS versions. | tactics: Discovery | detection: Mobile security products can typically detect rooted devices, which is an indication that Process Discovery is possible. Application vetting could potentially detect when applications attempt to abuse root access or root the system itself. Further, application vetting services could look for attempted usage of legacy process discovery mechanisms, such as the usage of `ps` or inspection of the `/proc` directory. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Process Injection | description: Adversaries may inject code into processes in order to evade process-based defenses or even elevate privileges. Process injection is a method of executing arbitrary code in the address space of a separate live process. Running code in the context of another process may allow access to the process's memory, system/network resources, and possibly elevated privileges. Execution via process injection may also evade detection from security products since the execution is masked under a legitimate process.   Both Android and iOS have no legitimate way to achieve process injection. The only way this is possible is by abusing existing root access or exploiting a vulnerability. | tactics: Defense Evasion, Privilege Escalation | detection: Application vetting services could look for misuse of dynamic libraries. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Protected User Data | description: Adversaries may utilize standard operating system APIs to collect data from permission-backed data stores on a device, such as the calendar or contact list. These permissions need to be declared ahead of time. On Android, they must be included in the application’s manifest. On iOS, they must be included in the application’s `Info.plist` file.       In almost all cases, the user is required to grant access to the data store that the application is trying to access. In recent OS versions, vendors have introduced additional privacy controls for users, such as the ability to grant permission to an application only while the application is being actively used by the user.      If the device has been jailbroken or rooted, an adversary may be able to access [Protected User Data](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1636) without the user’s knowledge or approval. | tactics: Collection | detection: Users can view permissions granted to an application in device settings. Application vetting services typically flag permissions requested by an application, which can be reviewed by an administrator. Certain dangerous permissions, such as `RECEIVE_SMS`, could receive additional scrutiny. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Proxy Through Victim | description: Adversaries may use a compromised device as a proxy server to the Internet. By utilizing a proxy, adversaries hide the true IP address of their C2 server and associated infrastructure from the destination of the network traffic. This masquerades an adversary’s traffic as legitimate traffic originating from the compromised device, which can evade IP-based restrictions and alerts on certain services, such as bank accounts and social media websites.(Citation: Threat Fabric Exobot)  The most common type of proxy is a SOCKS proxy. It can typically be implemented using standard OS-level APIs and 3rd party libraries with no indication to the user. On Android, adversaries can use the `Proxy` API to programmatically establish a SOCKS proxy connection, or lower-level APIs to interact directly with raw sockets. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Enterprises may be able to detect anomalous traffic originating from mobile devices, which could indicate compromise. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Ptrace System Calls | description: Adversaries may inject malicious code into processes via ptrace (process trace) system calls in order to evade process-based defenses as well as possibly elevate privileges. Ptrace system call injection is a method of executing arbitrary code in the address space of a separate live process.    Ptrace system call injection involves attaching to and modifying a running process. The ptrace system call enables a debugging process to observe and control another process (and each individual thread), including changing memory and register values.(Citation: PTRACE man) Ptrace system call injection is commonly performed by writing arbitrary code into a running process (e.g., by using `malloc`) then invoking that memory with `PTRACE_SETREGS` to set the register containing the next instruction to execute. Ptrace system call injection can also be done with `PTRACE_POKETEXT`/`PTRACE_POKEDATA`, which copy data to a specific address in the target process's memory (e.g., the current address of the next instruction).(Citation: PTRACE man)(Citation: Medium Ptrace JUL 2018)    Ptrace system call injection may not be possible when targeting processes with high-privileges, and on some systems those that are non-child processes.(Citation: BH Linux Inject)    Running code in the context of another process may allow access to the process's memory, system/network resources, and possibly elevated privileges. Execution via ptrace system call injection may also evade detection from security products since the execution is masked under a legitimate process. | tactics: Defense Evasion, Privilege Escalation | detection: Application vetting services could look for misuse of dynamic libraries. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Remote Access Software | description: Adversaries may use legitimate remote access software, such as `VNC`, `TeamViewer`, `AirDroid`, `AirMirror`, etc., to establish an interactive command and control channel to target mobile devices.    Remote access applications may be installed and used post-compromise as an alternate communication channel for redundant access or as a way to establish an interactive remote session with the target device. They may also be used as a component of malware to establish a reverse connection to an adversary-controlled system or service. Installation of remote access tools may also include persistence. | tactics: Command and Control | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Remote Device Management Services | description: An adversary may use access to cloud services (e.g. Google's Android Device Manager or Apple iCloud's Find my iPhone) or to an enterprise mobility management (EMM)/mobile device management (MDM) server console to track the location of mobile devices managed by the service.(Citation: Krebs-Location) | tactics: Collection, Discovery | detection: Google sends a notification to the device when Android Device Manager is used to locate it. Additionally, Google provides the ability for users to view their general account activity and alerts users when their credentials have been used on a new device. Apple iCloud also provides notifications to users of account activity such as when credentials have been used. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Replication Through Removable Media | description: Adversaries may move onto devices by exploiting or copying malware to devices connected via USB. In the case of Lateral Movement, adversaries may utilize the physical connection of a device to a compromised or malicious charging station or PC to bypass application store requirements and install malicious applications directly.(Citation: Lau-Mactans) In the case of Initial Access, adversaries may attempt to exploit the device via the connection to gain access to data stored on the device.(Citation: Krebs-JuiceJacking) Examples of this include:    * Exploiting insecure bootloaders in a Nexus 6 or 6P device over USB and gaining the ability to perform actions including intercepting phone calls, intercepting network traffic, and obtaining the device physical location.(Citation: IBM-NexusUSB)  * Exploiting weakly-enforced security boundaries in Android devices such as the Google Pixel 2 over USB.(Citation: GoogleProjectZero-OATmeal)  * Products from Cellebrite and Grayshift purportedly that can exploit some iOS devices using physical access to the data port to unlock the passcode.(Citation: Computerworld-iPhoneCracking) | tactics: Initial Access, Lateral Movement | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: SIM Card Swap | description: Adversaries may gain access to mobile devices through transfers or swaps from victims’ phone numbers to adversary-controlled SIM cards and mobile devices.(Citation: ATT SIM Swap Scams)(Citation: Verizon SIM Swapping)   The typical process is as follows:    1. Adversaries will first gather information about victims through [Phishing](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1660), social engineering, data breaches, or other avenues.  2. Adversaries will then impersonate victims as they contact mobile carriers to request for the SIM swaps. For example, adversaries would provide victims’ name and address to mobile carriers; once authenticated, adversaries would request for victims’ phone numbers to be transferred to adversary-controlled SIM cards.   3. Once completed, victims will lose mobile data, such as text messages and phone calls, on their mobile devices. In turn, adversaries will receive mobile data that was intended for the victims.    Adversaries may use the intercepted SMS messages to log into online accounts that use SMS-based authentication. Specifically, adversaries may use SMS-based authentication to log into banking and/or cryptocurrency accounts, then transfer funds to adversary-controlled wallets. | tactics: Initial Access | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Jennifer Kim Roman; Karim Hasanen, @_karimhasanen"
techniques,"name: SMS Control | description: Adversaries may delete, alter, or send SMS messages without user authorization. This could be used to hide C2 SMS messages, spread malware, or various external effects.  This can be accomplished by requesting the `RECEIVE_SMS` or `SEND_SMS` permissions depending on what the malware is attempting to do. If the app is set as the default SMS handler on the device, the `SMS_DELIVER` broadcast intent can be registered, which allows the app to write to the SMS content provider. The content provider directly modifies the messaging database on the device, which could allow malicious applications with this ability to insert, modify, or delete arbitrary messages on the device.(Citation: SMS KitKat)(Citation: Android SmsProvider) | tactics: Impact | detection: Users can view the default SMS handler in system settings. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: SMS Messages | description: Adversaries may utilize standard operating system APIs to gather SMS messages. On Android, this can be accomplished using the SMS Content Provider. iOS provides no standard API to access SMS messages.   If the device has been jailbroken or rooted, an adversary may be able to access [SMS Messages](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1636/004) without the user’s knowledge or approval. | tactics: Collection | detection: On Android, the user can manage which applications have permission to access SMS messages through the device settings screen, revoking the permission if necessary. Application vetting services could look for `android.permission.READ_SMS` in an Android application’s manifest. Most applications do not need access to SMS messages, so extra scrutiny could be applied to those that request it. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: SSL Pinning | description: Adversaries may use [SSL Pinning](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1521/003)  to protect the C2 traffic from being intercepted and analyzed.  [SSL Pinning](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1521/003)  is a technique commonly utilized by legitimate websites to ensure that encrypted communications are only allowed with a pre-defined certificate. If another certificate is presented, it could indicate device compromise, traffic interception, or another upstream issue. While benign usages are common, it is also possible for adversaries to abuse this technology to protect malicious C2 traffic.  In normal, not pinned SSL validation, when a client connects to a server using HTTPS, it typically checks whether the server’s SSL/TLS certificate is signed by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA) in the device’s trust store. If the certificate is valid and signed by a trusted CA, the connection is established. However, with [SSL Pinning](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1521/003) , the client is configured to trust a specific SSL/TLS certificate or public key, rather than relying on the device’s trust store. This means that even if the server’s certificate is signed by a trusted CA, the client will only establish the connection of the certificate or key is pinned.  There are two types of [SSL Pinning](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1521/003) :  1.	Certificate Pinning: The client stores a copy of the server’s certificate and compares it with the certificate received during the SSL handshake. If the certificates match, then the client proceeds with the connection. This approach also works with self-signed certificates.  2.	Public Key Pinning: Instead of pinning the entire certificate, the client pins just the public key extracted from the certificate. This is often more flexible, as it allows the server to renew its certificate without having to update the pinned certificate or breaking the SSL connection. | tactics: Command and Control | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Manikantan Srinivasan, NEC Corporation India; Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India; Takahashi Wataru, NEC Corporation"
techniques,"name: Scheduled Task/Job | description: Adversaries may abuse task scheduling functionality to facilitate initial or recurring execution of malicious code. On Android and iOS, APIs and libraries exist to facilitate scheduling tasks to execute at a specified date, time, or interval.  On Android, the `WorkManager` API allows asynchronous tasks to be scheduled with the system. `WorkManager` was introduced to unify task scheduling on Android, using `JobScheduler`, `GcmNetworkManager`, and `AlarmManager` internally. `WorkManager` offers a lot of flexibility for scheduling, including periodically, one time, or constraint-based (e.g. only when the device is charging).(Citation: Android WorkManager)  On iOS, the `NSBackgroundActivityScheduler` API allows asynchronous tasks to be scheduled with the system. The tasks can be scheduled to be repeating or non-repeating, however, the system chooses when the tasks will be executed. The app can choose the interval for repeating tasks, or the delay between scheduling and execution for one-time tasks.(Citation: Apple NSBackgroundActivityScheduler) | tactics: Execution, Persistence | detection: Scheduling tasks/jobs can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Lorin Wu, Trend Micro"
techniques,"name: Screen Capture | description: Adversaries may use screen capture to collect additional information about a target device, such as applications running in the foreground, user data, credentials, or other sensitive information. Applications running in the background can capture screenshots or videos of another application running in the foreground by using the Android `MediaProjectionManager` (generally requires the device user to grant consent).(Citation: Fortinet screencap July 2019)(Citation: Android ScreenCap1 2019) Background applications can also use Android accessibility services to capture screen contents being displayed by a foreground application.(Citation: Lookout-Monokle) An adversary with root access or Android Debug Bridge (adb) access could call the Android `screencap` or `screenrecord` commands.(Citation: Android ScreenCap2 2019)(Citation: Trend Micro ScreenCap July 2015) | tactics: Collection | detection: The user can view a list of apps with accessibility service privileges in the device settings. Application vetting services can look for the use of the Android `MediaProjectionManager` class, applying extra scrutiny to applications that use the class. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Security Software Discovery | description: Adversaries may attempt to get a listing of security applications and configurations that are installed on a device. This may include things such as mobile security products. Adversaries may use the information from [Security Software Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1418/001) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors, including whether or not to fully infect the target and/or attempt specific actions. | tactics: Discovery | detection: Application vetting services could look for the Android permission `android.permission.QUERY_ALL_PACKAGES`, and apply extra scrutiny to applications that request it. On iOS, application vetting services could look for usage of the private API `LSApplicationWorkspace` and apply extra scrutiny to applications that employ it. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Software Discovery | description: Adversaries may attempt to get a listing of applications that are installed on a device. Adversaries may use the information from [Software Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1418) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors, including whether or not to fully infect the target and/or attempts specific actions.      Adversaries may attempt to enumerate applications for a variety of reasons, such as figuring out what security measures are present or to identify the presence of target applications. | tactics: Discovery | detection: Application vetting services could look for the Android permission `android.permission.QUERY_ALL_PACKAGES`, and apply extra scrutiny to applications that request it. On iOS, application vetting services could look for usage of the private API `LSApplicationWorkspace` and apply extra scrutiny to applications that employ it. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Software Packing | description: Adversaries may perform software packing to conceal their code. Software packing is a method of compressing or encrypting an executable. Packing an executable changes the file signature in an attempt to avoid signature-based detection. Most decompression techniques decompress the executable code in memory.   Utilities used to perform software packing are called packers. An example packer is FTT. A more comprehensive list of known packers is available, but adversaries may create their own packing techniques that do not leave the same artifacts as well-known packers to evade defenses. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Application vetting services could look for known software packers or artifacts of packing techniques. Packing is not a definitive indicator of malicious activity, because as legitimate software may use packing techniques to reduce binary size or to protect proprietary code. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Steal Application Access Token | description: Adversaries can steal user application access tokens as a means of acquiring credentials to access remote systems and resources. This can occur through social engineering or URI hijacking and typically requires user action to grant access, such as through a system “Open With” dialogue.    Application access tokens are used to make authorized API requests on behalf of a user and are commonly used as a way to access resources in cloud-based applications and software-as-a-service (SaaS).(Citation: Auth0 - Why You Should Always Use Access Tokens to Secure APIs Sept 2019) OAuth is one commonly implemented framework used to issue tokens to users for access to systems. An application desiring access to cloud-based services or protected APIs can gain entry through OAuth 2.0 using a variety of authorization protocols. An example of a commonly-used sequence is Microsoft's Authorization Code Grant flow.(Citation: Microsoft Identity Platform Protocols May 2019)(Citation: Microsoft - OAuth Code Authorization flow - June 2019) An OAuth access token enables a third-party application to interact with resources containing user data in the ways requested without requiring user credentials. | tactics: Credential Access | detection: On Android, users may be presented with a popup to select the appropriate application to open a URI in. If the user sees an application they do not recognize, they can remove it. When vetting applications for potential security weaknesses, the vetting process could look for insecure use of Intents. Developers should be encouraged to use techniques to ensure that the intent can only be sent to an appropriate destination (e.g., use explicit rather than implicit intents, permission checking, checking of the destination app's signing certificate, or utilizing the App Links feature). For mobile applications using OAuth, encourage use of best practice.(Citation: IETF-OAuthNativeApps)(Citation: Android-AppLinks) | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Steganography | description: Adversaries may use steganography techniques in order to prevent the detection of hidden information. Steganographic techniques can be used to hide data in digital media such as images, audio tracks, video clips, or text files. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Detection of steganography is difficult unless detectable artifacts with a known signature are left behind by the obfuscation process. Look for strings are other signatures left in system artifacts related to decoding steganography. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Stored Application Data | description: Adversaries may try to access and collect application data resident on the device. Adversaries often target popular applications, such as Facebook, WeChat, and Gmail.(Citation: SWB Exodus March 2019)      Due to mobile OS sandboxing, this technique is only possible in three scenarios:      * An application stores files in unprotected external storage  * An application stores files in its internal storage directory with insecure permissions (e.g. 777)  * The adversary gains root permissions on the device | tactics: Collection | detection: Application vetting services could detect when applications store data insecurely, for example, in unprotected external storage. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Subvert Trust Controls | description: Adversaries may undermine security controls that will either warn users of untrusted activity or prevent execution of untrusted applications. Operating systems and security products may contain mechanisms to identify programs or websites as possessing some level of trust. Examples of such features include: an app being allowed to run because it is signed by a valid code signing certificate; an OS prompt alerting the user that an app came from an untrusted source; or getting an indication that you are about to connect to an untrusted site. The method adversaries use will depend on the specific mechanism they seek to subvert. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: On Android, the user can use the device settings menu to view trusted CA certificates and look for unexpected or unknown certificates. A mobile security product could similarly examine the trusted CA certificate store for anomalies. Users can use the device settings menu to view which applications on the device are allowed to install unknown applications.   On iOS, the user can use the device settings menu to view installed Configuration Profiles and look for unexpected or unknown profiles. A Mobile Device Management (MDM) system could use the iOS MDM APIs to examine the list of installed Configuration Profiles for anomalies. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Supply Chain Compromise | description: Adversaries may manipulate products or product delivery mechanisms prior to receipt by a final consumer for the purpose of data or system compromise.  Supply chain compromise can take place at any stage of the supply chain including:  * Manipulation of development tools * Manipulation of a development environment * Manipulation of source code repositories (public or private) * Manipulation of source code in open-source dependencies * Manipulation of software update/distribution mechanisms * Compromised/infected system images * Replacement of legitimate software with modified versions * Sales of modified/counterfeit products to legitimate distributors * Shipment interdiction  While supply chain compromise can impact any component of hardware or software, attackers looking to gain execution have often focused on malicious additions to legitimate software in software distribution or update channels. Targeting may be specific to a desired victim set or malicious software may be distributed to a broad set of consumers but only move on to additional tactics on specific victims.  Popular open source projects that are used as dependencies in many applications may also be targeted as a means to add malicious code to users of the dependency, specifically with the widespread usage of third-party advertising libraries.(Citation: Grace-Advertisement)(Citation: NowSecure-RemoteCode) | tactics: Initial Access | detection: Usage of insecure or malicious third-party libraries could be detected by application vetting services. Malicious software development tools could be detected by enterprises that deploy endpoint protection software on computers that are used to develop mobile apps. Application vetting could detect the usage of insecure or malicious third-party libraries. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Suppress Application Icon | description: A malicious application could suppress its icon from being displayed to the user in the application launcher. This hides the fact that it is installed, and can make it more difficult for the user to uninstall the application. Hiding the application's icon programmatically does not require any special permissions.   This behavior has been seen in the BankBot/Spy Banker family of malware.(Citation: android-trojan-steals-paypal-2fa)(Citation: sunny-stolen-credentials)(Citation: bankbot-spybanker)   Beginning in Android 10, changes were introduced to inhibit malicious applications’ ability to hide their icon. If an app is a system app, requests no permissions, or does not have a launcher activity, the application’s icon will be fully hidden. Further, if the device is fully managed or the application is in a work profile, the icon will be fully hidden. Otherwise, a synthesized activity is shown, which is a launcher icon that represents the app’s details page in the system settings. If the user clicks the synthesized activity in the launcher, they are taken to the application’s details page in the system settings.(Citation: Android 10 Limitations to Hiding App Icons)(Citation: LauncherApps getActivityList) | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: The user can examine the list of all installed applications, including those with a suppressed icon, in the device settings. If the user is redirected to the device settings when tapping an application’s icon, they should inspect the application to ensure it is genuine. Application vetting services could potentially detect the usage of APIs intended for suppressing the application’s icon. | platforms: Android | contributors: Emily Ratliff, IBM"
techniques,"name: Symmetric Cryptography | description: Adversaries may employ a known symmetric encryption algorithm to conceal command and control traffic, rather than relying on any inherent protections provided by a communication protocol. Symmetric encryption algorithms use the same key for plaintext encryption and ciphertext decryption. Common symmetric encryption algorithms include AES, Blowfish, and RC4. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Since data encryption is a common practice in many legitimate applications and uses standard programming language-specific APIs, encrypting data for command and control communication is regarded as undetectable to the user. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: System Checks | description: Adversaries may employ various system checks to detect and avoid virtualization and analysis environments. This may include changing behavior after checking for the presence of artifacts indicative of a virtual environment or sandbox. If the adversary detects a virtual environment, they may alter their malware’s behavior to disengage from the victim or conceal the core functions of the implant. They may also search for virtualization artifacts before dropping secondary or additional payloads.   Checks could include generic system properties such as host/domain name and samples of network traffic. Adversaries may also check the network adapters addresses, CPU core count, and available memory/drive size.   Hardware checks, such as the presence of motion sensors, could also be used to gather evidence that can be indicative a virtual environment. Adversaries may also query for specific readings from these devices. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Application vetting services could look for applications attempting to get `android.os.SystemProperties` or `getprop` with the runtime `exec()` commands. This could indicate some level of sandbox evasion, as Google recommends against using system properties within applications. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: System Information Discovery | description: Adversaries may attempt to get detailed information about a device’s operating system and hardware, including versions, patches, and architecture. Adversaries may use the information from [System Information Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1426) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors, including whether or not to fully infects the target and/or attempts specific actions.      On Android, much of this information is programmatically accessible to applications through the `android.os.Build` class. (Citation: Android-Build) iOS is much more restrictive with what information is visible to applications. Typically, applications will only be able to query the device model and which version of iOS it is running. | tactics: Discovery | detection: System information discovery can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: System Network Configuration Discovery | description: Adversaries may look for details about the network configuration and settings, such as IP and/or MAC addresses, of devices they access or through information discovery of remote systems.   Adversaries may use the information from [System Network Configuration Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1422) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors, including determining certain access within the target network and what actions to do next.   On Android, details of onboard network interfaces are accessible to apps through the `java.net.NetworkInterface` class.(Citation: NetworkInterface) Previously, the Android `TelephonyManager` class could be used to gather telephony-related device identifiers, information such as the IMSI, IMEI, and phone number. However, starting with Android 10, only preloaded, carrier, the default SMS, or device and profile owner applications can access the telephony-related device identifiers.(Citation: TelephonyManager)      On iOS, gathering network configuration information is not possible without root access.      Adversaries may use the information from [System Network Configuration Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1422) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors, including determining certain access within the target network and what actions to do next. | tactics: Discovery | detection: Application vetting services could look for usage of the `READ_PRIVILEGED_PHONE_STATE` Android permission. This could indicate that non-system apps are attempting to access information that they do not have access to. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: System Network Connections Discovery | description: Adversaries may attempt to get a listing of network connections to or from the compromised device they are currently accessing or from remote systems by querying for information over the network.      This is typically accomplished by utilizing device APIs to collect information about nearby networks, such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and cellular tower connections. On Android, this can be done by querying the respective APIs:      * `WifiInfo` for information about the current Wi-Fi connection, as well as nearby Wi-Fi networks. Querying the `WiFiInfo` API requires the application to hold the `ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION` permission.   * `BluetoothAdapter` for information about Bluetooth devices, which also requires the application to hold several permissions granted by the user at runtime.   * For Android versions prior to Q, applications can use the `TelephonyManager.getNeighboringCellInfo()` method. For Q and later, applications can use the `TelephonyManager.getAllCellInfo()` method. Both methods require the application hold the `ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION` permission. | tactics: Discovery | detection: System Network Connections Discovery can be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: System Runtime API Hijacking | description: Adversaries may execute their own malicious payloads by hijacking the way an operating system runs applications. Hijacking execution flow can be for the purposes of persistence since this hijacked execution may reoccur at later points in time.    On Android, adversaries may overwrite the standard OS API library with a malicious alternative to hook into core functions to achieve persistence. By doing this, the adversary’s code will be executed every time the overwritten API function is called by an app on the infected device. | tactics: Persistence | detection: Mobile threat defense agents could detect unauthorized operating system modifications by using attestation. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Transmitted Data Manipulation | description: Adversaries may alter data en route to storage or other systems in order to manipulate external outcomes or hide activity. By manipulating transmitted data, adversaries may attempt to affect a business process, organizational understanding, or decision making.  Manipulation may be possible over a network connection or between system processes where there is an opportunity to deploy a tool that will intercept and change information. The type of modification and the impact it will have depends on the target transmission mechanism as well as the goals and objectives of the adversary. For complex systems, an adversary would likely need special expertise and possibly access to specialized software related to the system, typically gained through a prolonged information gathering campaign, in order to have the desired impact.  One method to achieve [Transmitted Data Manipulation](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1641/001) is by modifying the contents of the device clipboard. Malicious applications may monitor clipboard activity through the `ClipboardManager.OnPrimaryClipChangedListener` interface on Android to determine when clipboard contents have changed. Listening to clipboard activity, reading clipboard contents, and modifying clipboard contents requires no explicit application permissions and can be performed by applications running in the background. However, this behavior has changed with the release of Android 10.  Adversaries may use [Transmitted Data Manipulation](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1641/001) to replace text prior to being pasted. For example, replacing a copied Bitcoin wallet address with a wallet address that is under adversarial control.  [Transmitted Data Manipulation](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1641/001) was seen within the Android/Clipper.C trojan. This sample was detected by ESET in an application distributed through the Google Play Store targeting cryptocurrency wallet numbers.(Citation: ESET Clipboard Modification February 2019) | tactics: Impact | detection: Applications could be vetted for their use of the clipboard manager APIs with extra scrutiny given to application that make use of them. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: URI Hijacking | description: Adversaries may register Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) to intercept sensitive data.   Applications regularly register URIs with the operating system to act as a response handler for various actions, such as logging into an app using an external account via single sign-on. This allows redirections to that specific URI to be intercepted by the application. If an adversary were to register for a URI that was already in use by a genuine application, the adversary may be able to intercept data intended for the genuine application or perform a phishing attack against the genuine application. Intercepted data may include OAuth authorization codes or tokens that could be used by the adversary to gain access to protected resources.(Citation: Trend Micro iOS URL Hijacking)(Citation: IETF-PKCE) | tactics: Credential Access | detection: On Android, users may be presented with a popup to select the appropriate application to open the URI in. If the user sees an application they do not recognize, they can remove it. When vetting applications for potential security weaknesses, the vetting process could look for insecure use of Intents. Developers should be encouraged to use techniques to ensure that the intent can only be sent to an appropriate destination (e.g., use explicit rather than implicit intents, permission checking, checking of the destination app's signing certificate, or utilizing the App Links feature). For mobile applications using OAuth, encourage use of best practice. (Citation: IETF-OAuthNativeApps)(Citation: Android-AppLinks) | platforms: Android, iOS | contributors: Leo Zhang, Trend Micro; Steven Du, Trend Micro"
techniques,"name: Uninstall Malicious Application | description: Adversaries may include functionality in malware that uninstalls the malicious application from the device. This can be achieved by:    * Abusing device owner permissions to perform silent uninstallation using device owner API calls.  * Abusing root permissions to delete files from the filesystem.  * Abusing the accessibility service. This requires sending an intent to the system to request uninstallation, and then abusing the accessibility service to click the proper places on the screen to confirm uninstallation. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Users can see a list of applications that can use accessibility services in the device settings. Application vetting services could look for use of the accessibility service or features that typically require root access. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Unix Shell | description: Adversaries may abuse Unix shell commands and scripts for execution. Unix shells are the underlying command prompts on Android and iOS devices. Unix shells can control every aspect of a system, with certain commands requiring elevated privileges that are only accessible if the device has been rooted or jailbroken.   Unix shells also support scripts that enable sequential execution of commands as well as other typical programming operations such as conditionals and loops. Common uses of shell scripts include long or repetitive tasks, or the need to run the same set of commands on multiple systems.   Adversaries may abuse Unix shells to execute various commands or payloads. Interactive shells may be accessed through command and control channels or during lateral movement such as with SSH. Adversaries may also leverage shell scripts to deliver and execute multiple commands on victims or as part of payloads used for persistence.   If the device has been rooted or jailbroken, adversaries may locate and invoke a superuser binary to elevate their privileges and interact with the system as the root user. This dangerous level of permissions allows the adversary to run special commands and modify protected system files. | tactics: Execution | detection: Command-line activities can potentially be detected through Mobile Threat Defense integrations with lower-level OS APIs. This could grant the MTD agents access to running processes and their parameters, potentially detecting unwanted or malicious shells.  Application vetting services could detect the invocations of methods that could be used to execute shell commands.(Citation: Samsung Knox Mobile Threat Defense) | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: User Evasion | description: Adversaries may attempt to avoid detection by hiding malicious behavior from the user. By doing this, an adversary’s modifications would most likely remain installed on the device for longer, allowing the adversary to continue to operate on that device.   While there are many ways this can be accomplished, one method is by using the device’s sensors. By utilizing the various motion sensors on a device, such as accelerometer or gyroscope, an application could detect that the device is being interacted with. That way, the application could continue to run while the device is not in use but cease operating while the user is using the device, hiding anything that would indicate malicious activity was ongoing. Accessing the sensors in this way does not require any permissions from the user, so it would be completely transparent. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Mobile security products may be able to detect some forms of user evasion. Otherwise, the act of hiding malicious activity could be difficult to detect, and therefore enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android"
techniques,"name: Video Capture | description: An adversary can leverage a device’s cameras to gather information by capturing video recordings. Images may also be captured, potentially in specified intervals, in lieu of video files.       Malware or scripts may interact with the device cameras through an available API provided by the operating system. Video or image files may be written to disk and exfiltrated later. This technique differs from [Screen Capture](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1513) due to use of the device’s cameras for video recording rather than capturing the victim’s screen.      In Android, an application must hold the `android.permission.CAMERA` permission to access the cameras. In iOS, applications must include the `NSCameraUsageDescription` key in the `Info.plist` file. In both cases, the user must grant permission to the requesting application to use the camera. If the device has been rooted or jailbroken, an adversary may be able to access the camera without knowledge of the user. | tactics: Collection | detection: The user can view which applications have permission to use the camera through the device settings screen, where the user can then choose to revoke the permissions. During the vetting process, applications using the Android permission `android.permission.CAMERA`, or the iOS `NSCameraUsageDescription` plist entry could be given closer scrutiny. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Virtualization Solution | description: Adversaries may carry out malicious operations using virtualization solutions to escape from Android sandboxes and to avoid detection. Android uses sandboxes to separate resources and code execution between applications and the operating system.(Citation: Android Application Sandbox) There are a few virtualization solutions available on Android, such as the Android Virtualization Framework (AVF).(Citation: Android AVF Overview)       Through virtualization solutions, adversaries may execute malicious operations without user knowledge. For example, adversaries may mimic a legitimate banking application’s functionalities in a virtual environment, thanks to the virtualization solution, while malicious code captures credentials. | tactics: Defense Evasion | platforms: Android | contributors: Liran Ravich, CardinalOps"
techniques,"name: Virtualization/Sandbox Evasion | description: Adversaries may employ various means to detect and avoid virtualization and analysis environments. This may include changing behaviors after checking for the presence of artifacts indicative of a virtual machine environment (VME) or sandbox. If the adversary detects a VME, they may alter their malware’s behavior to disengage from the victim or conceal the core functions of the payload. They may also search for VME artifacts before dropping further payloads. Adversaries may use the information learned from [Virtualization/Sandbox Evasion](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1633) during automated discovery to shape follow-on behaviors.   Adversaries may use several methods to accomplish [Virtualization/Sandbox Evasion](https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1633) such as checking for system artifacts associated with analysis or virtualization. Adversaries may also check for legitimate user activity to help determine if it is in an analysis environment. | tactics: Defense Evasion | detection: Application vetting services could look for applications attempting to get `android.os.SystemProperties` or `getprop` with the runtime `exec()` commands. This could indicate some level of sandbox evasion, as Google recommends against using system properties within applications. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Web Protocols | description: Adversaries may communicate using application layer protocols associated with web protocols traffic to avoid detection/network filtering by blending in with existing traffic. Commands to remote mobile devices, and often the results of those commands, will be embedded within the protocol traffic between the mobile client and server.   Web protocols such as HTTP and HTTPS are used for web traffic as well as well as notification services native to mobile messaging services such as Google Cloud Messaging (GCM) and newly, Firebase Cloud Messaging (FCM), (GCM/FCM: two-way communication) and Apple Push Notification Service (APNS; one-way server-to-device).  Such notification services leverage HTTP/S via the respective API and are commonly abused on Android and iOS respectively in order blend in with routine device traffic making it difficult for enterprises to inspect. | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Abuse of standard application protocols can be difficult to detect as many legitimate mobile applications leverage such protocols for language-specific APIs. Enterprises may be better served focusing on detection at other stages of adversarial behavior. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Web Service | description: Adversaries may use an existing, legitimate external Web service as a means for relaying data to/from a compromised system. Popular websites and social media, acting as a mechanism for C2, may give a significant amount of cover. This is due to the likelihood that hosts within a network are already communicating with them prior to a compromise. Using common services, such as those offered by Google or Twitter, makes it easier for adversaries to hide in expected noise. Web service providers commonly use SSL/TLS encryption, giving adversaries an added level of protection.      Use of Web services may also protect back-end C2 infrastructure from discovery through malware binary analysis, or enable operational resiliency (since this infrastructure may be dynamically changed). | tactics: Command and Control | detection: Application vetting services may provide a list of connections made or received by an application, or a list of domains contacted by the application. | platforms: Android, iOS"
techniques,"name: Wi-Fi Discovery | description: Adversaries may search for information about Wi-Fi networks, such as network names and passwords, on compromised systems. Adversaries may use Wi-Fi information as part of [Discovery](https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/TA0032) or [Credential Access](https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/TA0031) activity to support both ongoing and future campaigns. | tactics: Discovery | platforms: Android, iOS"
software,name: ANDROIDOS_ANSERVER.A | description: [ANDROIDOS_ANSERVER.A](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0310) is Android malware that is unique because it uses encrypted content within a blog site for command and control. (Citation: TrendMicro-Anserver) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: AbstractEmu | description: [AbstractEmu](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1061) is mobile malware that was first seen in Google Play and other third-party stores in October 2021. It was discovered in 19 Android applications, of which at least 7 abused known Android exploits for obtaining root permissions. [AbstractEmu](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1061) was observed primarily impacting users in the United States, however victims are believed to be across a total of 17 countries.(Citation: lookout_abstractemu_1021) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: Adups | description: [Adups](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0309) is software that was pre-installed onto Android devices, including those made by BLU Products. The software was reportedly designed to help a Chinese phone manufacturer monitor user behavior, transferring sensitive data to a Chinese server. (Citation: NYTimes-BackDoor) (Citation: BankInfoSecurity-BackDoor) | type: malware"
software,"name: Agent Smith | description: [Agent Smith](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0440) is mobile malware that generates financial gain by replacing legitimate applications on devices with malicious versions that include fraudulent ads. As of July 2019 [Agent Smith](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0440) had infected around 25 million devices, primarily targeting India though effects had been observed in other Asian countries as well as Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.(Citation: CheckPoint Agent Smith) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Aviran Hazum, Check Point; Sergey Persikov, Check Point"
software,"name: AhRat | description: [AhRat](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1095) is an Android remote access tool based on the open-source AhMyth remote access tool. [AhRat](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1095) initially spread in August 2022 on the Google Play Store via an update containing malicious code to the previously benign application, “iRecorder – Screen Recorder,” which itself was released in September 2021.(Citation: welivesecurity_ahrat_0523) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Edward Stevens, BT Security"
software,name: Allwinner | description: [Allwinner](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0319) is a company that supplies processors used in Android tablets and other devices. A Linux kernel distributed by [Allwinner](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0319) for use on these devices reportedly contained a backdoor. (Citation: HackerNews-Allwinner) | type: malware
software,"name: AndroRAT | description: [AndroRAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0292) is an open-source remote access tool for Android devices. [AndroRAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0292) is capable of collecting data, such as device location, call logs, etc., and is capable of executing actions, such as sending SMS messages and taking pictures.(Citation: Lookout-EnterpriseApps)(Citation: github_androrat)(Citation: Forcepoint BITTER Pakistan Oct 2016) It is originally available through the `The404Hacking` Github repository.(Citation: github_androrat) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: Android/AdDisplay.Ashas | description: [Android/AdDisplay.Ashas](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0525) is a variant of adware that has been distributed through multiple apps in the Google Play Store. (Citation: WeLiveSecurity AdDisplayAshas) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: Android/Chuli.A | description: [Android/Chuli.A](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0304) is Android malware that was delivered to activist groups via a spearphishing email with an attachment. (Citation: Kaspersky-WUC) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Android/SpyAgent | description: [Android/SpyAgent](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1214) is a variant of spyware in the MoqHao phishing campaign primarily targeting Korean and Japanese users.(Citation: McAfee MoqHao 2019) Fake security applications were used to target Japanese users, while fake police applications were used to target Korean users. Both fake applications have common C2 commands and share the same crash report key on a cloud service.(Citation: McAfee MoqHao 2019) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: AndroidOS/MalLocker.B | description: [AndroidOS/MalLocker.B](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0524) is a variant of a ransomware family targeting Android devices. It prevents the user from interacting with the UI by displaying a screen containing a ransom note over all other windows. (Citation: Microsoft MalLockerB) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Anubis | description: [Anubis](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0422) is Android malware that was originally used for cyber espionage, and has been retooled as a banking trojan.(Citation: Cofense Anubis) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Aviran Hazum, Check Point; Sergey Persikov, Check Point"
software,name: Asacub | description: [Asacub](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0540) is a banking trojan that attempts to steal money from victims’ bank accounts. It attempts to do this by initiating a wire transfer via SMS message from compromised devices.(Citation: Securelist Asacub) | platforms: Android | aliases: Trojan-SMS.AndroidOS.Smaps | type: malware
software,"name: BOULDSPY | description: [BOULDSPY](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1079) is an Android malware, detected in early 2023, with surveillance and remote-control capabilities. Analysis of exfiltrated C2 data suggests that [BOULDSPY](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1079) primarily targeted minority groups in Iran.(Citation: lookout_bouldspy_0423) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Gunji Satoshi, NEC Corporation; Manikantan Srinivasan, NEC Corporation India; Phyo Paing Htun (ChiLai), I-Secure Co.,Ltd; Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India"
software,"name: BRATA | description: [BRATA](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1094) (Brazilian Remote Access Tool, Android), is an evolving Android malware strain, detected in late 2018 and again in late 2021. Originating in Brazil, [BRATA](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1094) was later also found in the UK, Poland, Italy, Spain, and USA, where it is believed to have targeted financial institutions such as banks. There are currently three known variants of [BRATA](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1094).(Citation: securelist_brata_0819)(Citation: cleafy_brata_0122)(Citation: mcafee_brata_0421) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India"
software,"name: Binary Validator | description: [Binary Validator](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1215) is a Mach-O binary file used during [Operation Triangulation](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0054).(Citation: SecureList OpTriangulation 23Oct2023) [Binary Validator](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1215) first collects information about the device, such as the device's phone number and a list of installed applications, before the deployment of the [TriangleDB](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1216) implant.  After the actions are completed and the data is collected, [Binary Validator](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1215) encrypts and sends the data to the C2 server, and in turn, the C2 server sends the [TriangleDB](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1216) implant. | platforms: iOS | type: malware"
software,name: BrainTest | description: [BrainTest](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0293) is a family of Android malware. (Citation: CheckPoint-BrainTest) (Citation: Lookout-BrainTest) | type: malware
software,"name: Bread | description: [Bread](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0432) was a large-scale billing fraud malware family known for employing many different cloaking and obfuscation techniques in an attempt to continuously evade Google Play Store’s malware detection. 1,700 unique Bread apps were detected and removed from the Google Play Store before being downloaded by users.(Citation: Google Bread) | platforms: Android | aliases: Joker | type: malware | contributors: Aviran Hazum, Check Point; Jonathan Shimonovich, Check Point; Sergey Persikov, Check Point"
software,"name: BusyGasper | description: [BusyGasper](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0655) is Android spyware that has been in use since May 2016. There have been less than 10 victims, all who appear to be located in Russia, that were all infected via physical access to the device.(Citation: SecureList BusyGasper) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: CHEMISTGAMES | description: [CHEMISTGAMES](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0555) is a modular backdoor that has been deployed by [Sandworm Team](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0034).(Citation: CYBERWARCON CHEMISTGAMES) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: CarbonSteal | description: [CarbonSteal](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0529) is one of a family of four surveillanceware tools that share a common C2 infrastructure. [CarbonSteal](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0529) primarily deals with audio surveillance. (Citation: Lookout Uyghur Campaign) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Cerberus | description: [Cerberus](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0480) is a banking trojan whose usage can be rented on underground forums and marketplaces. Prior to being available to rent, the authors of [Cerberus](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0480) claim was used in private operations for two years.(Citation: Threat Fabric Cerberus) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Aviran Hazum, Check Point; Sergey Persikov, Check Point"
software,"name: Chameleon | description: [Chameleon](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1083) is an Android banking trojan that can leverage Android’s Accessibility Services to perform malicious activities. Believed to have been first active in January 2023, [Chameleon](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1083) has been observed targeting users in Australia and Poland by masquerading as official apps.(Citation: cyble_chameleon_0423) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Manikantan Srinivasan, NEC Corporation India; Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India; Yasuhito Kawanishi, NEC Corporation"
software,name: Charger | description: [Charger](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0323) is Android malware that steals steals contacts and SMS messages from the user's device. It can also lock the device and demand ransom payment if it receives admin permissions. (Citation: CheckPoint-Charger) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Circles | description: [Circles](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0602) reportedly takes advantage of Signaling System 7 (SS7) weaknesses, the protocol suite used to route phone calls, to both track the location of mobile devices and intercept voice calls and SMS messages. It can be connected to a telecommunications company’s infrastructure or purchased as a cloud service. Circles has reportedly been linked to the NSO Group.(Citation: CitizenLab Circles) | type: malware"
software,name: Concipit1248 | description: [Concipit1248](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0426) is iOS spyware that was discovered using the same name as the developer of the Android spyware [Corona Updates](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0425). Further investigation revealed that the two pieces of software contained the same C2 URL and similar functionality.(Citation: TrendMicro Coronavirus Updates) | platforms: iOS | aliases: Corona Updates | type: malware
software,"name: Corona Updates | description: [Corona Updates](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0425) is Android spyware that took advantage of the Coronavirus pandemic. The campaign distributing this spyware is tracked as Project Spy. Multiple variants of this spyware have been discovered to have been hosted on the Google Play Store.(Citation: TrendMicro Coronavirus Updates) | platforms: Android | aliases: Concipit1248, Wabi Music | type: malware"
software,"name: DEFENSOR ID | description: [DEFENSOR ID](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0479) is a banking trojan capable of clearing a victim’s bank account or cryptocurrency wallet and taking over email or social media accounts. [DEFENSOR ID](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0479) performs the majority of its malicious functionality by abusing Android’s accessibility service.(Citation: ESET DEFENSOR ID) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Lukáš Štefanko, ESET"
software,name: Dendroid | description: [Dendroid](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0301) is an Android remote access tool (RAT) primarily targeting Western countries. The RAT was available for purchase for $300 and came bundled with a utility to inject the RAT into legitimate applications.(Citation: Lookout-Dendroid) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Desert Scorpion | description: [Desert Scorpion](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0505) is surveillanceware that has targeted the Middle East, specifically individuals located in Palestine. [Desert Scorpion](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0505) is suspected to have been operated by the threat actor [APT-C-23](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1028).(Citation: Lookout Desert Scorpion)   There are multiple close variants of [Desert Scorpion](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0505), such as VAMP(Citation: Unit42 VAMP 2017), GnatSpy(Citation: Trendmicro GnatSpy 2017), [FrozenCell](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0577) and [SpyC23](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1195), which add some additional functionality but are not significantly different from the original malware. | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: DoubleAgent | description: [DoubleAgent](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0550) is a family of RAT malware dating back to 2013, known to target groups with contentious relationships with the Chinese government.(Citation: Lookout Uyghur Campaign) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: DressCode | description: [DressCode](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0300) is an Android malware family. (Citation: TrendMicro-DressCode) | type: malware
software,"name: Drinik | description: [Drinik](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1054) is an evolving Android banking trojan that was observed targeting customers of around 27 banks in India in August 2021. Initially seen as an SMS stealer in 2016, [Drinik](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1054) resurfaced as a banking trojan with more advanced capabilities included in subsequent versions between September 2021 and August 2022.(Citation: cyble_drinik_1022) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: DroidJack | description: [DroidJack](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0320) is an Android remote access tool that has been observed posing as legitimate applications including the Super Mario Run and Pokemon GO games. (Citation: Zscaler-SuperMarioRun) (Citation: Proofpoint-Droidjack) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: DualToy | description: [DualToy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0315) is Windows malware that installs malicious applications onto Android and iOS devices connected over USB. (Citation: PaloAlto-DualToy) | type: malware
software,name: Dvmap | description: [Dvmap](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0420) is rooting malware that injects malicious code into system runtime libraries. It is credited with being the first malware that performs this type of code injection.(Citation: SecureList DVMap June 2017) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Escobar | description: [Escobar](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1092) is an Android banking trojan, first detected in March 2021, believed to be a new variant of AbereBot.(Citation: Bleeipng Computer Escobar) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Hiroki Nagahama, NEC Corporation; Manikantan Srinivasan, NEC Corporation India; Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India"
software,"name: EventBot | description: [EventBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0478) is an Android banking trojan and information stealer that abuses Android’s accessibility service to steal data from various applications.(Citation: Cybereason EventBot) [EventBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0478) was designed to target over 200 different banking and financial applications, the majority of which are European bank and cryptocurrency exchange applications.(Citation: Cybereason EventBot) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: Exobot | description: [Exobot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0522) is Android banking malware, primarily targeting financial institutions in Germany, Austria, and France.(Citation: Threat Fabric Exobot) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: Exodus | description: [Exodus](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0405) is Android spyware deployed in two distinct stages named Exodus One (dropper) and Exodus Two (payload).(Citation: SWB Exodus March 2019) | platforms: Android | aliases: Exodus One, Exodus Two | type: malware"
software,"name: FakeSpy | description: [FakeSpy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0509) is Android spyware that has been operated by the Chinese threat actor behind the Roaming Mantis campaigns.(Citation: Cybereason FakeSpy) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Ofir Almkias, Cybereason"
software,"name: Fakecalls | description: [Fakecalls](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1080) is an Android trojan, first detected in January 2021, that masquerades as South Korean banking apps. It has capabilities to intercept calls to banking institutions and even maintain realistic dialogues with the victim using pre-recorded audio snippets.(Citation: kaspersky_fakecalls_0422) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Hiroki Nagahama, NEC Corporation; Manikantan Srinivasan, NEC Corporation India; Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India"
software,"name: FinFisher | description: [FinFisher](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0182) is a government-grade commercial surveillance spyware reportedly sold exclusively to government agencies for use in targeted and lawful criminal investigations. It is heavily obfuscated and uses multiple anti-analysis techniques. It has other variants including [Wingbird](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0176). (Citation: FinFisher Citation) (Citation: Microsoft SIR Vol 21) (Citation: FireEye FinSpy Sept 2017) (Citation: Securelist BlackOasis Oct 2017) (Citation: Microsoft FinFisher March 2018) | platforms: Android, Windows | aliases: FinSpy | type: malware"
software,"name: FjordPhantom | description: [FjordPhantom](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1208) is a malicious Android application first discovered in September 2024 with targets in Southeast Asia, specifically Indonesia, Thailand, and Vietnam. [FjordPhantom](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1208) was distributed through email and messaging applications. Once installed, the application launches a virtualization solution to steal important information, such as bank accounts, and to manipulate the user interface. The malicious activity from the virtualization solution runs alongside legitimate banking applications.(Citation: Promon FjordPhantom Oct2024) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Liran Ravich, CardinalOps"
software,"name: FlexiSpy | description: [FlexiSpy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0408) is sophisticated surveillanceware for iOS and Android. Publicly-available, comprehensive analysis has only been found for the Android version.(Citation: FortiGuard-FlexiSpy)(Citation: CyberMerchants-FlexiSpy)  [FlexiSpy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0408) markets itself as a parental control and employee monitoring application.(Citation: FlexiSpy-Website) | platforms: Android | type: tool | contributors: Emily Ratliff, IBM"
software,"name: FlixOnline | description: [FlixOnline](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1103) is an Android malware, first detected in early 2021, believed to target users of WhatsApp. [FlixOnline](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1103) primarily spreads via automatic replies to a device’s incoming WhatsApp messages.(Citation: checkpoint_flixonline_0421) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: FluBot | description: [FluBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1067) is a multi-purpose mobile banking malware that was first observed in Spain in late 2020. It primarily spread through European countries using a variety of SMS phishing messages in multiple languages.(Citation: proofpoint_flubot_0421)(Citation: bitdefender_flubot_0524) An international law enforcement operation of 11 countries eventually disrupted the spread of [FluBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1067).(Citation: Europol FluBot Jun2022) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: FlyTrap | description: [FlyTrap](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1093) is an Android trojan, first detected in March 2021, that uses social engineering tactics to compromise Facebook accounts. [FlyTrap](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1093) was initially detected through infected apps on the Google Play store, and is believed to have impacted over 10,000 victims across at least 140 countries.(Citation: Trend Micro FlyTrap) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Hiroki Nagahama, NEC Corporation; Manikantan Srinivasan, NEC Corporation India; Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India"
software,"name: FrozenCell | description: [FrozenCell](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0577) is the mobile component of a family of surveillanceware, with a corresponding desktop component known as KasperAgent and [Micropsia](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0339).(Citation: Lookout FrozenCell)   There are multiple close variants of [FrozenCell](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0577), such as VAMP(Citation: Unit42 VAMP 2017), GnatSpy(Citation: Trendmicro GnatSpy 2017), [Desert Scorpion](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0505) and [SpyC23](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1195), which add some additional functionality but are not significantly different from the original malware. | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: GPlayed | description: [GPlayed](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0536) is an Android trojan with a broad range of capabilities.(Citation: Talos GPlayed) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Ginp | description: [Ginp](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0423) is an Android banking trojan that has been used to target Spanish banks. Some of the code was taken directly from [Anubis](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0422).(Citation: ThreatFabric Ginp) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Aviran Hazum, Check Point; Sergey Persikov, Check Point"
software,name: Golden Cup | description: [Golden Cup](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0535) is Android spyware that has been used to target World Cup fans.(Citation: Symantec GoldenCup) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: GoldenEagle | description: [GoldenEagle](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0551) is a piece of Android malware that has been used in targeting of Uyghurs, Muslims, Tibetans, individuals in Turkey, and individuals in China. Samples have been found as early as 2012.(Citation: Lookout Uyghur Campaign) | type: malware"
software,name: GolfSpy | description: [GolfSpy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0421) is Android spyware deployed by the group [Bouncing Golf](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0097).(Citation: Trend Micro Bouncing Golf 2019) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: Gooligan | description: [Gooligan](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0290) is a malware family that runs privilege escalation exploits on Android devices and then uses its escalated privileges to steal authentication tokens that can be used to access data from many Google applications. [Gooligan](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0290) has been described as part of the Ghost Push Android malware family. (Citation: Gooligan Citation) (Citation: Ludwig-GhostPush) (Citation: Lookout-Gooligan) | platforms: Android | aliases: Ghost Push | type: malware
software,name: Gustuff | description: [Gustuff](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0406) is mobile malware designed to steal users' banking and virtual currency credentials.(Citation: Talos Gustuff Apr 2019) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: HenBox | description: [HenBox](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0544) is Android malware that attempts to only execute on Xiaomi devices running the MIUI operating system. [HenBox](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0544) has primarily been used to target Uyghurs, a minority Turkic ethnic group.(Citation: Palo Alto HenBox) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: HilalRAT | description: [HilalRAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1128) is a remote access-capable Android malware, developed and used by [UNC788](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1029).(Citation: Meta Adversarial Threat Report 2022)   [HilalRAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1128) is capable of collecting data, such as device location, call logs, etc., and is capable of executing actions, such as activating a device's camera and microphone.(Citation: Meta Adversarial Threat Report 2022) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Denise Tan"
software,"name: Hornbill | description: [Hornbill](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1077) is one of two mobile malware families known to be used by the APT [Confucius](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0142). Analysis suggests that [Hornbill](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1077) was first active in early 2018. While [Hornbill](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1077) and [Sunbird](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1082) overlap in core capabilities, [Hornbill](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1077) has tools and behaviors suggesting more passive reconnaissance.(Citation: lookout_hornbill_sunbird_0221) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: HummingBad | description: [HummingBad](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0322) is a family of Android malware that generates fraudulent advertising revenue and has the ability to obtain root access on older, vulnerable versions of Android. (Citation: ArsTechnica-HummingBad) | type: malware"
software,name: HummingWhale | description: [HummingWhale](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0321) is an Android malware family that performs ad fraud. (Citation: ArsTechnica-HummingWhale) | type: malware
software,name: INSOMNIA | description: [INSOMNIA](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0463) is spyware that has been used by the group Evil Eye.(Citation: Volexity Insomnia) | platforms: iOS | type: malware
software,name: Judy | description: [Judy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0325) is auto-clicking adware that was distributed through multiple apps in the Google Play Store. (Citation: CheckPoint-Judy) | type: malware
software,name: KeyRaider | description: [KeyRaider](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0288) is malware that steals Apple account credentials and other data from jailbroken iOS devices. It also has ransomware functionality. (Citation: Xiao-KeyRaider) | type: malware
software,"name: LightSpy | description: First observed in 2018, LightSpy is a modular malware family that initially targeted iOS devices in Southern Asia before expanding to Android and macOS platforms. It consists of a downloader, a main executable that manages network communications, and functionality-specific modules, typically implemented as `.dylib` files (iOS, macOS) or `.apk` files (Android). LightSpy can collect VoIP call recordings, SMS messages, and credential stores, which are then exfiltrated to a command and control (C2) server.(Citation: MelikovBlackBerry LightSpy 2024) | platforms: Android, Windows, iOS, macOS | type: malware | contributors: Alden Schmidt; Dmitry Bestuzhev"
software,"name: Mandrake | description: [Mandrake](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0485) is a sophisticated Android espionage platform that has been active in the wild since at least 2016. [Mandrake](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0485) is very actively maintained, with sophisticated features and attacks that are executed with surgical precision.  [Mandrake](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0485) has gone undetected for several years by providing legitimate, ad-free applications with social media and real reviews to back the apps. The malware is only activated when the operators issue a specific command.(Citation: Bitdefender Mandrake) | platforms: Android | aliases: briar, darkmatter, oxide, ricinus | type: malware"
software,name: MazarBOT | description: [MazarBOT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0303) is Android malware that was distributed via SMS in Denmark in 2016. (Citation: Tripwire-MazarBOT) | type: malware
software,"name: Monokle | description: [Monokle](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0407) is targeted, sophisticated mobile surveillanceware. It is developed for Android, but there are some code artifacts that suggests an iOS version may be in development.(Citation: Lookout-Monokle) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Jörg Abraham, EclecticIQ"
software,name: NotCompatible | description: [NotCompatible](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0299) is an Android malware family that was used between at least 2014 and 2016. It has multiple variants that have become more sophisticated over time. (Citation: Lookout-NotCompatible) | type: malware
software,name: OBAD | description: OBAD is an Android malware family. (Citation: TrendMicro-Obad) | type: malware
software,name: OldBoot | description: [OldBoot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0285) is an Android malware family. (Citation: HackerNews-OldBoot) | type: malware
software,name: PJApps | description: [PJApps](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0291) is an Android malware family. (Citation: Lookout-EnterpriseApps) | type: malware
software,name: Pallas | description: [Pallas](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0399) is mobile surveillanceware that was custom-developed by [Dark Caracal](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0070).(Citation: Lookout Dark Caracal Jan 2018) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: Pegasus for Android | description: [Pegasus for Android](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0316) is the Android version of malware that has reportedly been linked to the NSO Group. (Citation: Lookout-PegasusAndroid) (Citation: Google-Chrysaor) The iOS version is tracked separately under [Pegasus for iOS](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0289). | platforms: Android | aliases: Chrysaor | type: malware
software,name: Pegasus for iOS | description: [Pegasus for iOS](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0289) is the iOS version of malware that has reportedly been linked to the NSO Group. It has been advertised and sold to target high-value victims.(Citation: Lookout-Pegasus)(Citation: PegasusCitizenLab) The Android version is tracked separately under [Pegasus for Android](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0316). | platforms: iOS | type: malware
software,"name: Phenakite | description: [Phenakite](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1126) is a mobile malware that is used by [APT-C-23](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1028) to target iOS devices. According to several reports, [Phenakite](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1126) was developed to fill a tooling gap and to target those who owned iPhones instead of Windows desktops or Android phones.(Citation: sentinelone_israel_hamas_war)(Citation: fb_arid_viper) | platforms: iOS | type: malware | contributors: Sittikorn Sangrattanapitak"
software,name: RCSAndroid | description: [RCSAndroid](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0295) is Android malware. (Citation: TrendMicro-RCSAndroid) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: Red Alert 2.0 | description: [Red Alert 2.0](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0539) is a banking trojan that masquerades as a VPN client.(Citation: Sophos Red Alert 2.0) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: RedDrop | description: [RedDrop](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0326) is an Android malware family that exfiltrates sensitive data from devices. (Citation: Wandera-RedDrop) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: Riltok | description: [Riltok](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0403) is banking malware that uses phishing popups to collect user credentials.(Citation: Kaspersky Riltok June 2019) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Rotexy | description: [Rotexy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0411) is an Android banking malware that has evolved over several years. It was originally an SMS spyware Trojan first spotted in October 2014, and since then has evolved to contain more features, including ransomware functionality.(Citation: securelist rotexy 2018) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: RuMMS | description: [RuMMS](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0313) is an Android malware family. (Citation: FireEye-RuMMS) | type: malware
software,"name: S.O.V.A. | description: [S.O.V.A.](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1062) is an Android banking trojan that was first identified in August 2021 and has subsequently been found in a variety of applications, including banking, cryptocurrency wallet/exchange, and shopping apps. [S.O.V.A.](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1062), which is Russian for ""owl"", contains features not commonly found in Android malware, such as session cookie theft.(Citation: threatfabric_sova_0921)(Citation: cleafy_sova_1122) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: SharkBot | description: [SharkBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1055) is a banking malware, first discovered in October 2021, that tries to initiate money transfers directly from compromised devices by abusing Accessibility Services.(Citation: nccgroup_sharkbot_0322) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: ShiftyBug | description: [ShiftyBug](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0294) is an auto-rooting adware family of malware for Android. The family is very similar to the other Android families known as Shedun, Shuanet, Kemoge, though it is not believed all the families were created by the same group. (Citation: Lookout-Adware) | type: malware"
software,name: SilkBean | description: [SilkBean](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0549) is a piece of Android surveillanceware containing comprehensive remote access tool (RAT) functionality that has been used in targeting of the Uyghur ethnic group.(Citation: Lookout Uyghur Campaign) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: SimBad | description: [SimBad](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0419) was a strain of adware on the Google Play Store, distributed through the RXDroider Software Development Kit. The name ""SimBad"" was derived from the fact that most of the infected applications were simulator games. The adware was controlled using an instance of the open source framework Parse Server.(Citation: CheckPoint SimBad 2019) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: Skygofree | description: [Skygofree](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0327) is Android spyware that is believed to have been developed in 2014 and used through at least 2017. (Citation: Kaspersky-Skygofree) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: SpyC23 | description: [SpyC23](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1195) is a mobile malware that has been used by [APT-C-23](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1028) since at least 2017. [SpyC23](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1195) has been observed primarily targeting Android devices in the Middle East.(Citation: welivesecurity_apt-c-23)   There are multiple close variants of [SpyC23](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1195), such as VAMP(Citation: Unit42 VAMP 2017), GnatSpy(Citation: Trendmicro GnatSpy 2017), [Desert Scorpion](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0505) and [FrozenCell](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0577), which add some additional functionality but are not significantly different from the original malware. | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Sittikorn Sangrattanapitak"
software,name: SpyDealer | description: [SpyDealer](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0324) is Android malware that exfiltrates sensitive data from Android devices. (Citation: PaloAlto-SpyDealer) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: SpyNote RAT | description: [SpyNote RAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0305) (Remote Access Trojan) is a family of malicious Android apps. The [SpyNote RAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0305) builder tool can be used to develop malicious apps with the malware's functionality. (Citation: Zscaler-SpyNote) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Stealth Mango | description: [Stealth Mango](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0328) is Android malware that has reportedly been used to successfully compromise the mobile devices of government officials, members of the military, medical professionals, and civilians. The iOS malware known as [Tangelo](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0329) is believed to be from the same developer. (Citation: Lookout-StealthMango) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: Sunbird | description: [Sunbird](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1082) is one of two mobile malware families known to be used by the APT [Confucius](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0142).  Analysis suggests that [Sunbird](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1082) was first active in early 2017. While [Sunbird](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1082) and [Hornbill](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1077) overlap in core capabilities, [Sunbird](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1082) has a more extensive set of malicious features.(Citation: lookout_hornbill_sunbird_0221) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: TERRACOTTA | description: [TERRACOTTA](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0545) is an ad fraud botnet that has been capable of generating over 2 billion fraudulent requests per week.(Citation: WhiteOps TERRACOTTA) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: Tangelo | description: [Tangelo](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0329) is iOS malware that is believed to be from the same developers as the [Stealth Mango](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0328) Android malware. It is not a mobile application, but rather a Debian package that can only run on jailbroken iOS devices. (Citation: Lookout-StealthMango) | platforms: iOS | type: malware"
software,"name: TangleBot | description: [TangleBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1069) is SMS malware that was initially observed in September 2021, primarily targeting mobile users in the United States and Canada. [TangleBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1069) has used SMS text message lures about COVID-19 regulations and vaccines to trick mobile users into downloading the malware, similar to [FluBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1067) Android malware campaigns.(Citation: cloudmark_tanglebot_0921) | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,"name: TianySpy | description: [TianySpy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1056) is a mobile malware primarily spread by SMS phishing between September 30 and October 12, 2021. [TianySpy](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1056) is believed to have targeted credentials associated with membership websites of major Japanese telecommunication services.(Citation: trendmicro_tianyspy_0122) | platforms: Android, iOS | type: malware"
software,name: Tiktok Pro | description: [Tiktok Pro](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0558) is spyware that has been masquerading as the TikTok application.(Citation: Zscaler TikTok Spyware) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: Triada | description: [Triada](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0424) was first reported in 2016 as a second stage malware. Later versions in 2019 appeared with new techniques and as an initial downloader of other Trojan apps.(Citation: Kaspersky Triada March 2016) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: TriangleDB | description: [TriangleDB](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1216) is an Objective-C written implant deployed after [Binary Validator](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1215) and after root privileges are obtained during [Operation Triangulation](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0054)’s infection chain. Upon execution, [TriangleDB](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1216) communicates with the C2 server, relaying information about the victim device.(Citation: SecureList OpTriangulation 21Jun2023) | platforms: iOS | type: malware"
software,"name: TrickMo | description: [TrickMo](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0427) a 2FA bypass mobile banking trojan, most likely being distributed by [TrickBot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0266). [TrickMo](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0427) has been primarily targeting users located in Germany.(Citation: SecurityIntelligence TrickMo)  [TrickMo](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0427) is designed to steal transaction authorization numbers (TANs), which are typically used as one-time passwords.(Citation: SecurityIntelligence TrickMo) | platforms: Android | type: malware | contributors: Aviran Hazum, Check Point; Ohad Mana, Check Point; Sergey Persikov, Check Point"
software,name: Trojan-SMS.AndroidOS.Agent.ao | description: [Trojan-SMS.AndroidOS.Agent.ao](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0307) is Android malware. (Citation: Kaspersky-MobileMalware) | type: malware
software,name: Trojan-SMS.AndroidOS.FakeInst.a | description: [Trojan-SMS.AndroidOS.FakeInst.a](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0306) is Android malware. (Citation: Kaspersky-MobileMalware) | type: malware
software,name: Trojan-SMS.AndroidOS.OpFake.a | description: [Trojan-SMS.AndroidOS.OpFake.a](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0308) is Android malware. (Citation: Kaspersky-MobileMalware) | type: malware
software,name: Twitoor | description: [Twitoor](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0302) is a dropper application capable of receiving commands from social media.(Citation: ESET-Twitoor) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: ViceLeaker | description: [ViceLeaker](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0418) is a spyware framework, capable of extensive surveillance and data exfiltration operations, primarily targeting devices belonging to Israeli citizens.(Citation: SecureList - ViceLeaker 2019)(Citation: Bitdefender - Triout 2018) | platforms: Android | aliases: Triout | type: malware"
software,name: ViperRAT | description: [ViperRAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0506) is sophisticated surveillanceware that has been in operation since at least 2015 and was used to target the Israeli Defense Force.(Citation: Lookout ViperRAT) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,name: WireLurker | description: [WireLurker](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0312) is a family of macOS malware that targets iOS devices connected over USB. (Citation: PaloAlto-WireLurker) | type: malware
software,name: WolfRAT | description: [WolfRAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0489) is malware based on a leaked version of [Dendroid](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0301) that has primarily targeted Thai users. [WolfRAT](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0489) has most likely been operated by the now defunct organization Wolf Research.(Citation: Talos-WolfRAT) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: X-Agent for Android | description: [X-Agent for Android](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0314) is Android malware that was placed in a repackaged version of a Ukrainian artillery targeting application. The malware reportedly retrieved general location data on where the victim device was used, and therefore could likely indicate the potential location of Ukrainian artillery. (Citation: CrowdStrike-Android) Is it tracked separately from the [CHOPSTICK](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0023). | type: malware"
software,"name: XLoader for Android | description: [XLoader for Android](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0318) is a malicious Android app first observed targeting Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong in 2018. It has more recently been observed targeting South Korean users as a pornography application.(Citation: TrendMicro-XLoader-FakeSpy)(Citation: TrendMicro-XLoader) It is tracked separately from the [XLoader for iOS](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0490). | platforms: Android | type: malware"
software,name: XLoader for iOS | description: [XLoader for iOS](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0490) is a malicious iOS application that is capable of gathering system information.(Citation: TrendMicro-XLoader-FakeSpy) It is tracked separately from the [XLoader for Android](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0318). | platforms: iOS | type: malware
software,name: Xbot | description: [Xbot](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0298) is an Android malware family that was observed in 2016 primarily targeting Android users in Russia and Australia. (Citation: PaloAlto-Xbot) | type: tool
software,name: XcodeGhost | description: [XcodeGhost](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0297) is iOS malware that infected at least 39 iOS apps in 2015 and potentially affected millions of users. (Citation: PaloAlto-XcodeGhost1) (Citation: PaloAlto-XcodeGhost) | type: malware
software,"name: YiSpecter | description: [YiSpecter](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0311) is a family of iOS and Android malware, first detected in November 2014, targeting users in mainland China and Taiwan. [YiSpecter](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0311) abuses private APIs in iOS to infect both jailbroken and non-jailbroken devices.(Citation: paloalto_yispecter_1015) | platforms: Android, iOS | type: malware"
software,name: Zen | description: [Zen](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0494) is Android malware that was first seen in 2013.(Citation: Google Security Zen) | platforms: Android | type: malware
software,"name: ZergHelper | description: [ZergHelper](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0287) is iOS riskware that was unique due to its apparent evasion of Apple's App Store review process. No malicious functionality was identified in the app, but it presents security risks. (Citation: Xiao-ZergHelper) | type: malware"
software,"name: eSurv | description: [eSurv](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0507) is mobile surveillanceware designed for the lawful intercept market that was developed over the course of many years.(Citation: Lookout eSurv) | platforms: Android, iOS | type: malware"
groups,"name: APT-C-23 | description: [APT-C-23](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1028) is a threat group that has been active since at least 2014.(Citation: symantec_mantis) [APT-C-23](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1028) has primarily focused its operations on the Middle East, including Israeli military assets. [APT-C-23](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1028) has developed mobile spyware targeting Android and iOS devices since 2017.(Citation: welivesecurity_apt-c-23) | associated groups: Arid Viper, Big Bang APT, Desert Falcon, Grey Karkadann, Mantis, TAG-63, Two-tailed Scorpion | contributors: Sittikorn Sangrattanapitak"
groups,"name: APT28 | description: [APT28](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0007) is a threat group that has been attributed to Russia's General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) 85th Main Special Service Center (GTsSS) military unit 26165.(Citation: NSA/FBI Drovorub August 2020)(Citation: Cybersecurity Advisory GRU Brute Force Campaign July 2021) This group has been active since at least 2004.(Citation: DOJ GRU Indictment Jul 2018)(Citation: Ars Technica GRU indictment Jul 2018)(Citation: Crowdstrike DNC June 2016)(Citation: FireEye APT28)(Citation: SecureWorks TG-4127)(Citation: FireEye APT28 January 2017)(Citation: GRIZZLY STEPPE JAR)(Citation: Sofacy DealersChoice)(Citation: Palo Alto Sofacy 06-2018)(Citation: Symantec APT28 Oct 2018)(Citation: ESET Zebrocy May 2019)  [APT28](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0007) reportedly compromised the Hillary Clinton campaign, the Democratic National Committee, and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee in 2016 in an attempt to interfere with the U.S. presidential election.(Citation: Crowdstrike DNC June 2016) In 2018, the US indicted five GRU Unit 26165 officers associated with [APT28](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0007) for cyber operations (including close-access operations) conducted between 2014 and 2018 against the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), the US Anti-Doping Agency, a US nuclear facility, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the Spiez Swiss Chemicals Laboratory, and other organizations.(Citation: US District Court Indictment GRU Oct 2018) Some of these were conducted with the assistance of GRU Unit 74455, which is also referred to as [Sandworm Team](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0034). | associated groups: FROZENLAKE, Fancy Bear, Forest Blizzard, Group 74, GruesomeLarch, IRON TWILIGHT, Pawn Storm, SNAKEMACKEREL, STRONTIUM, Sednit, Sofacy, Swallowtail, TG-4127, Threat Group-4127, Tsar Team | contributors: Drew Church, Splunk; Emily Ratliff, IBM; Richard Gold, Digital Shadows; Sébastien Ruel, CGI"
groups,"name: APT41 | description: [APT41](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0096) is a threat group that researchers have assessed as Chinese state-sponsored espionage group that also conducts financially-motivated operations. Active since at least 2012, [APT41](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0096) has been observed targeting various industries, including but not limited to healthcare, telecom, technology, finance, education, retail and video game industries in 14 countries.(Citation: apt41_mandiant) Notable behaviors include using a wide range of malware and tools to complete mission objectives. [APT41](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0096) overlaps at least partially with public reporting on groups including BARIUM and [Winnti Group](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0044).(Citation: FireEye APT41 Aug 2019)(Citation: Group IB APT 41 June 2021) | associated groups: BARIUM, Brass Typhoon, Wicked Panda | contributors: Kyaw Pyiyt Htet, @KyawPyiytHtet; Nikita Rostovcev, Group-IB"
groups,"name: BITTER | description: [BITTER](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1002) is a suspected South Asian cyber espionage threat group that has been active since at least 2013. [BITTER](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1002) has targeted government, energy, and engineering organizations in Pakistan, China, Bangladesh, and Saudi Arabia.(Citation: Cisco Talos Bitter Bangladesh May 2022)(Citation: Forcepoint BITTER Pakistan Oct 2016) | associated groups: T-APT-17"
groups,name: Bouncing Golf | description: [Bouncing Golf](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0097) is a cyberespionage campaign targeting Middle Eastern countries.(Citation: Trend Micro Bouncing Golf 2019)
groups,"name: Confucius | description: [Confucius](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0142) is a cyber espionage group that has primarily targeted military personnel, high-profile personalities, business persons, and government organizations in South Asia since at least 2013. Security researchers have noted similarities between [Confucius](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0142) and [Patchwork](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0040), particularly in their respective custom malware code and targets.(Citation: TrendMicro Confucius APT Feb 2018)(Citation: TrendMicro Confucius APT Aug 2021)(Citation: Uptycs Confucius APT Jan 2021) | associated groups: Confucius APT"
groups,name: Dark Caracal | description: [Dark Caracal](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0070) is threat group that has been attributed to the Lebanese General Directorate of General Security (GDGS) and has operated since at least 2012. (Citation: Lookout Dark Caracal Jan 2018)
groups,"name: Earth Lusca | description: [Earth Lusca](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1006) is a suspected China-based cyber espionage group that has been active since at least April 2019. [Earth Lusca](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1006) has targeted organizations in Australia, China, Hong Kong, Mongolia, Nepal, the Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam, the United Arab Emirates, Nigeria, Germany, France, and the United States. Targets included government institutions, news media outlets, gambling companies, educational institutions, COVID-19 research organizations, telecommunications companies, religious movements banned in China, and cryptocurrency trading platforms; security researchers assess some [Earth Lusca](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1006) operations may be financially motivated.(Citation: TrendMicro EarthLusca 2022)  [Earth Lusca](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1006) has used malware commonly used by other Chinese threat groups, including [APT41](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0096) and the [Winnti Group](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0044) cluster, however security researchers assess [Earth Lusca](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1006)'s techniques and infrastructure are separate.(Citation: TrendMicro EarthLusca 2022) | associated groups: CHROMIUM, Charcoal Typhoon, ControlX, TAG-22"
groups,"name: LAPSUS$ | description: [LAPSUS$](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1004) is cyber criminal threat group that has been active since at least mid-2021. [LAPSUS$](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1004) specializes in large-scale social engineering and extortion operations, including destructive attacks without the use of ransomware. The group has targeted organizations globally, including in the government, manufacturing, higher education, energy, healthcare, technology, telecommunications, and media sectors.(Citation: BBC LAPSUS Apr 2022)(Citation: MSTIC DEV-0537 Mar 2022)(Citation: UNIT 42 LAPSUS Mar 2022) | associated groups: DEV-0537, Strawberry Tempest | contributors: Caio Silva; David Hughes, BT Security; Flávio Costa, @Segurança Descomplicada; Matt Brenton, Zurich Insurance Group"
groups,name: MoustachedBouncer | description: [MoustachedBouncer](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1019) is a cyberespionage group that has been active since at least 2014 targeting foreign embassies in Belarus.(Citation: MoustachedBouncer ESET August 2023)
groups,name: PROMETHIUM | description: [PROMETHIUM](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0056) is an activity group focused on espionage that has been active since at least 2012. The group has conducted operations globally with a heavy emphasis on Turkish targets. [PROMETHIUM](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0056) has demonstrated similarity to another activity group called [NEODYMIUM](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0055) due to overlapping victim and campaign characteristics.(Citation: Microsoft NEODYMIUM Dec 2016)(Citation: Microsoft SIR Vol 21)(Citation: Talos Promethium June 2020) | associated groups: StrongPity
groups,"name: Sandworm Team | description: [Sandworm Team](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0034) is a destructive threat group that has been attributed to Russia's General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) Main Center for Special Technologies (GTsST) military unit 74455.(Citation: US District Court Indictment GRU Unit 74455 October 2020)(Citation: UK NCSC Olympic Attacks October 2020) This group has been active since at least 2009.(Citation: iSIGHT Sandworm 2014)(Citation: CrowdStrike VOODOO BEAR)(Citation: USDOJ Sandworm Feb 2020)(Citation: NCSC Sandworm Feb 2020)  In October 2020, the US indicted six GRU Unit 74455 officers associated with [Sandworm Team](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0034) for the following cyber operations: the 2015 and 2016 attacks against Ukrainian electrical companies and government organizations, the 2017 worldwide [NotPetya](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0368) attack, targeting of the 2017 French presidential campaign, the 2018 [Olympic Destroyer](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0365) attack against the Winter Olympic Games, the 2018 operation against the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and attacks against the country of Georgia in 2018 and 2019.(Citation: US District Court Indictment GRU Unit 74455 October 2020)(Citation: UK NCSC Olympic Attacks October 2020) Some of these were conducted with the assistance of GRU Unit 26165, which is also referred to as [APT28](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0007).(Citation: US District Court Indictment GRU Oct 2018) | associated groups: APT44, BlackEnergy (Group), ELECTRUM, FROZENBARENTS, IRIDIUM, IRON VIKING, Quedagh, Seashell Blizzard, Telebots, Voodoo Bear | contributors: Dragos Threat Intelligence; Hakan KARABACAK"
groups,"name: Scattered Spider | description: [Scattered Spider](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1015) is a native English-speaking cybercriminal group that has been active since at least 2022.(Citation: CrowdStrike Scattered Spider Profile)(Citation: MSTIC Octo Tempest Operations October 2023) The group initially targeted customer relationship management and business-process outsourcing (BPO) firms as well as telecommunications and technology companies. Beginning in 2023, [Scattered Spider](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1015) expanded its operations to compromise victims in the gaming, hospitality, retail, MSP, manufacturing, and financial sectors.(Citation: MSTIC Octo Tempest Operations October 2023) During campaigns, [Scattered Spider](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1015) has leveraged targeted social-engineering techniques, attempted to bypass popular endpoint security tools, and more recently, deployed ransomware for financial gain.(Citation: CISA Scattered Spider Advisory November 2023)(Citation: CrowdStrike Scattered Spider BYOVD January 2023)(Citation: CrowdStrike Scattered Spider Profile)(Citation: MSTIC Octo Tempest Operations October 2023)(Citation: Crowdstrike TELCO BPO Campaign December 2022) | associated groups: Octo Tempest, Roasted 0ktapus, Storm-0875"
groups,name: UNC788 | description: [UNC788](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G1029) is a group of hackers from Iran that has targeted people in the Middle East.(Citation: Meta Adversarial Threat Report 2022) | contributors: Denise Tan
groups,"name: Windshift | description: [Windshift](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0112) is a threat group that has been active since at least 2017, targeting specific individuals for surveillance in government departments and critical infrastructure across the Middle East.(Citation: SANS Windshift August 2018)(Citation: objective-see windtail1 dec 2018)(Citation: objective-see windtail2 jan 2019) | associated groups: Bahamut"
campaigns,"name: C0033 | description: [C0033](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0033) was a [PROMETHIUM](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0056) campaign during which they used [StrongPity](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S0491) to target Android users. [C0033](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0033) was the first publicly documented mobile campaign for [PROMETHIUM](https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0056), who previously used Windows-based techniques.(Citation: welivesec_strongpity) | first seen: 01 May 2016 | last seen: 01 January 2023 | contributors: Hiroki Nagahama, NEC Corporation; Manikantan Srinivasan, NEC Corporation India; Pooja Natarajan, NEC Corporation India"
campaigns,"name: Operation Dust Storm | description: [Operation Dust Storm](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0016) was a long-standing persistent cyber espionage campaign that targeted multiple industries in Japan, South Korea, the United States, Europe, and several Southeast Asian countries. By 2015, the [Operation Dust Storm](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0016) threat actors shifted from government and defense-related intelligence targets to Japanese companies or Japanese subdivisions of larger foreign organizations supporting Japan's critical infrastructure, including electricity generation, oil and natural gas, finance, transportation, and construction.(Citation: Cylance Dust Storm)  [Operation Dust Storm](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0016) threat actors also began to use Android backdoors in their operations by 2015, with all identified victims at the time residing in Japan or South Korea.(Citation: Cylance Dust Storm) | first seen: 01 January 2010 | last seen: 01 February 2016"
campaigns,"name: Operation Triangulation | description: [Operation Triangulation](https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0054) is a mobile campaign targeting iOS devices.(Citation: SecureList OpTriangulation 01Jun2023) The unidentified actors used zero-click exploits in iMessage attachments to gain [Initial Access](https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/TA0027), then executed exploits and validators, such as [Binary Validator](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1215) before finally executing the [TriangleDB](https://attack.mitre.org/software/S1216) implant. | first seen: 01 January 2019 | last seen: 01 June 2023"
mitigations,"name: Antivirus/Antimalware | description: Mobile security products, such as Mobile Threat Defense (MTD), offer various device-based mitigations against certain behaviors."
mitigations,"name: Application Developer Guidance | description: Application Developer Guidance focuses on providing developers with the knowledge, tools, and best practices needed to write secure code, reduce vulnerabilities, and implement secure design principles. By integrating security throughout the software development lifecycle (SDLC), this mitigation aims to prevent the introduction of exploitable weaknesses in applications, systems, and APIs. This mitigation can be implemented through the following measures:   Preventing SQL Injection (Secure Coding Practice):  - Implementation: Train developers to use parameterized queries or prepared statements instead of directly embedding user input into SQL queries. - Use Case: A web application accepts user input to search a database. By sanitizing and validating user inputs, developers can prevent attackers from injecting malicious SQL commands.  Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) Mitigation:  - Implementation: Require developers to implement output encoding for all user-generated content displayed on a web page. - Use Case: An e-commerce site allows users to leave product reviews. Properly encoding and escaping user inputs prevents malicious scripts from being executed in other users’ browsers.  Secure API Design:  - Implementation: Train developers to authenticate all API endpoints and avoid exposing sensitive information in API responses. - Use Case: A mobile banking application uses APIs for account management. By enforcing token-based authentication for every API call, developers reduce the risk of unauthorized access.  Static Code Analysis in the Build Pipeline:  - Implementation: Incorporate tools into CI/CD pipelines to automatically scan for vulnerabilities during the build process. - Use Case: A fintech company integrates static analysis tools to detect hardcoded credentials in their source code before deployment.  Threat Modeling in the Design Phase:  - Implementation: Use frameworks like STRIDE (Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure, Denial of Service, Elevation of Privilege) to assess threats during application design. - Use Case: Before launching a customer portal, a SaaS company identifies potential abuse cases, such as session hijacking, and designs mitigations like secure session management.  **Tools for Implementation**:  - Static Code Analysis Tools: Use tools that can scan for known vulnerabilities in source code. - Dynamic Application Security Testing (DAST): Use tools like Burp Suite or OWASP ZAP to simulate runtime attacks and identify vulnerabilities. - Secure Frameworks: Recommend secure-by-default frameworks (e.g., Django for Python, Spring Security for Java) that enforce security best practices."
mitigations,name: Attestation | description: Enable remote attestation capabilities when available (such as Android SafetyNet or Samsung Knox TIMA Attestation) and prohibit devices that fail the attestation from accessing enterprise resources.
mitigations,"name: Deploy Compromised Device Detection Method | description: A variety of methods exist that can be used to enable enterprises to identify compromised (e.g. rooted/jailbroken) devices, whether using security mechanisms built directly into the device, third-party mobile security applications, enterprise mobility management (EMM)/mobile device management (MDM) capabilities, or other methods. Some methods may be trivial to evade while others may be more sophisticated."
mitigations,name: Do Not Mitigate | description: This category is to associate techniques that mitigation might increase risk of compromise and therefore mitigation is not recommended.
mitigations,"name: Encrypt Network Traffic | description: Application developers should encrypt all of their application network traffic using the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol to ensure protection of sensitive data and deter network-based attacks. If desired, application developers could perform message-based encryption of data before passing it for TLS encryption.  iOS's App Transport Security feature can be used to help ensure that all application network traffic is appropriately protected. Apple intends to mandate use of App Transport Security  (Citation: TechCrunch-ATS) for all apps in the Apple App Store unless appropriate justification is given.  Android's Network Security Configuration feature similarly can be used by app developers to help ensure that all of their application network traffic is appropriately protected  (Citation: Android-NetworkSecurityConfig).  Use of Virtual Private Network (VPN) tunnels, e.g. using the IPsec protocol, can help mitigate some types of network attacks as well."
mitigations,"name: Enterprise Policy | description: An enterprise mobility management (EMM), also known as mobile device management (MDM), system can be used to provision policies to mobile devices to control aspects of their allowed behavior."
mitigations,"name: Interconnection Filtering | description: In order to mitigate Signaling System 7 (SS7) exploitation, the Communications, Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council (CSRIC) describes filtering interconnections between network operators to block inappropriate requests (Citation: CSRIC5-WG10-FinalReport)."
mitigations,"name: Lock Bootloader | description: On devices that provide the capability to unlock the bootloader (hence allowing any operating system code to be flashed onto the device), perform periodic checks to ensure that the bootloader is locked."
mitigations,"name: Security Updates | description: Install security updates in response to discovered vulnerabilities.  Purchase devices with a vendor and/or mobile carrier commitment to provide security updates in a prompt manner for a set period of time.  Decommission devices that will no longer receive security updates.  Limit or block access to enterprise resources from devices that have not installed recent security updates.  On Android devices, access can be controlled based on each device's security patch level. On iOS devices, access can be controlled based on the iOS version."
mitigations,"name: System Partition Integrity | description: Ensure that Android devices being used include and enable the Verified Boot capability, which cryptographically ensures the integrity of the system partition."
mitigations,name: Use Recent OS Version | description: New mobile operating system versions bring not only patches against discovered vulnerabilities but also often bring security architecture improvements that provide resilience against potential vulnerabilities or weaknesses that have not yet been discovered. They may also bring improvements that block use of observed adversary techniques.
mitigations,name: User Guidance | description: Describes any guidance or training given to users to set particular configuration settings or avoid specific potentially risky behaviors.
datasources,"name: Application Vetting | description: Application vetting report generated by an external cloud service. | collection layers: Report | platforms: Android, iOS"
datasources,name: Application Vetting: API Calls | description: API calls utilized by an application that could indicate malicious activity
datasources,name: Application Vetting: Application Assets | description: Additional assets included with an application
datasources,name: Application Vetting: Network Communication | description: Network requests made by an application or domains contacted
datasources,name: Application Vetting: Permissions Requests | description: Permissions declared in an application's manifest or property list file
datasources,name: Application Vetting: Protected Configuration | description: Device configuration options that are not typically utilized by benign applications
datasources,"name: Command | description: A directive given to a computer program, acting as an interpreter of some kind, in order to perform a specific task(Citation: Confluence Linux Command  Line)(Citation: Audit OSX) | collection layers: Container, Host | platforms: Android, Containers, ESXi, Linux, Network Devices, Windows, iOS, macOS"
datasources,"name: Command: Command Execution | description: Command Execution involves monitoring and capturing the execution of textual commands (including shell commands, cmdlets, and scripts) within an operating system or application. These commands may include arguments or parameters and are typically executed through interpreters such as `cmd.exe`, `bash`, `zsh`, `PowerShell`, or programmatic execution. Examples:   - Windows Command Prompt     - dir – Lists directory contents.     - net user – Queries or manipulates user accounts.     - tasklist – Lists running processes. - PowerShell     - Get-Process – Retrieves processes running on a system.     - Set-ExecutionPolicy – Changes PowerShell script execution policies.     - Invoke-WebRequest – Downloads remote resources. - Linux Shell     - ls – Lists files in a directory.     - cat /etc/passwd – Reads the user accounts file.     - curl http://malicious-site.com – Retrieves content from a malicious URL. - Container Environments     - docker exec – Executes a command inside a running container.     - kubectl exec – Runs commands in Kubernetes pods. - macOS Terminal     - open – Opens files or URLs.     - dscl . -list /Users – Lists all users on the system.     - osascript -e – Executes AppleScript commands.  This data component can be collected through the following measures:  Enable Command Logging  - Windows:     - Enable PowerShell logging: `Set-ExecutionPolicy Bypass`, `Set-ItemProperty -Path ""HKLM:\SOFTWARE\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\PowerShell\ScriptBlockLogging"" -Name EnableScriptBlockLogging -Value 1`     - Enable Windows Event Logging:         - Event ID 4688: Tracks process creation, including command-line arguments.         - Event ID 4104: Logs PowerShell script block execution. - Linux/macOS:     - Enable shell history logging in `.bashrc` or `.zshrc`: `export HISTTIMEFORMAT=""%d/%m/%y %T ""`, `export PROMPT_COMMAND='history -a; history -w'`     - Use audit frameworks (e.g., `auditd`) to log command executions. Example rule to log all `execve` syscalls: `-a always,exit -F arch=b64 -S execve -k cmd_exec` - Containers:     - Use runtime-specific tools like Docker’s --log-driver or Kubernetes Audit Logs to capture exec commands.  Integrate with Centralized Logging  - Collect logs using a SIEM (e.g., Splunk) or cloud-based log aggregation tools like AWS CloudWatch or Azure Monitor. Example Splunk Search for Windows Event 4688: `index=windows EventID=4688 CommandLine=*`  Use Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) Tools  - Monitor command executions via EDR solutions   Deploy Sysmon for Advanced Logging (Windows)  - Use Sysmon's Event ID 1 to log process creation with command-line arguments"
datasources,"name: Network Traffic | description: Data transmitted across a network (ex: Web, DNS, Mail, File, etc.), that is either summarized (ex: Netflow) and/or captured as raw data in an analyzable format (ex: PCAP) | collection layers: Cloud Control Plane, Host, Network | platforms: Android, ESXi, IaaS, Linux, Windows, iOS, macOS"
datasources,"name: Network Traffic: Network Connection Creation | description: The initial establishment of a network session, where a system or process initiates a connection to a local or remote endpoint. This typically involves capturing socket information (source/destination IP, ports, protocol) and tracking session metadata. Monitoring these events helps detect lateral movement, exfiltration, and command-and-control (C2) activities.  *Data Collection Measures:*  - Windows:     - Event ID 5156 – Filtering Platform Connection - Logs network connections permitted by Windows Filtering Platform (WFP).     - Sysmon Event ID 3 – Network Connection Initiated - Captures process, source/destination IP, ports, and parent process. - Linux/macOS:     - Netfilter (iptables), nftables logs - Tracks incoming and outgoing network connections.     - AuditD (`connect` syscall) - Logs TCP, UDP, and ICMP connections.     - Zeek (`conn.log`) - Captures protocol, duration, and bytes transferred. - Cloud & Network Infrastructure:     - AWS VPC Flow Logs / Azure NSG Flow Logs - Logs IP traffic at the network level in cloud environments.     - Zeek (conn.log) or Suricata (network events) - Captures packet metadata for detection and correlation. - Endpoint Detection & Response (EDR):     - Detect anomalous network activity such as new C2 connections or data exfiltration attempts."
datasources,"name: Network Traffic: Network Traffic Content | description: The full packet capture (PCAP) or session data that logs both protocol headers and payload content. This allows analysts to inspect command and control (C2) traffic, exfiltration, and other suspicious activity within network communications. Unlike metadata-based logs, full content analysis enables deeper protocol inspection, payload decoding, and forensic investigations.  *Data Collection Measures:*  - Network Packet Capture (Full Content Logging)     - Wireshark / tcpdump / tshark         - Full packet captures (PCAP files) for manual analysis or IDS correlation. `tcpdump -i eth0 -w capture.pcap`     - Zeek (formerly Bro)         - Extracts protocol headers and payload details into structured logs. `echo ""redef Log::default_store = Log::ASCII;"" > local.zeek | zeek -Cr capture.pcap local.zeek`     - Suricata / Snort (IDS/IPS with PCAP Logging)         - Deep packet inspection (DPI) with signature-based and behavioral analysis. `suricata -c /etc/suricata/suricata.yaml -i eth0 -l /var/log/suricata` - Host-Based Collection     - Sysmon Event ID 22 – DNS Query Logging, Captures DNS requests made by processes, useful for detecting C2 domains.     - Sysmon Event ID 3 – Network Connection Initiated, Logs process-to-network connection relationships.     - AuditD (Linux) – syscall=connect, Monitors outbound network requests from processes. `auditctl -a always,exit -F arch=b64 -S connect -k network_activity` - Cloud & SaaS Traffic Collection     - AWS VPC Flow Logs / Azure NSG Flow Logs / Google VPC Flow Logs, Captures metadata about inbound/outbound network traffic.     - Cloud IDS (AWS GuardDuty, Azure Sentinel, Google Chronicle), Detects malicious activity in cloud environments by analyzing network traffic patterns."
datasources,"name: Network Traffic: Network Traffic Flow | description: Summarized network packet data that captures session-level details such as source/destination IPs, ports, protocol types, timestamps, and data volume, without storing full packet payloads. This is commonly used for traffic analysis, anomaly detection, and network performance monitoring.  *Data Collection Measures:*  - Network Flow Logs (Metadata Collection)     - NetFlow          - Summarized metadata for network conversations (no packet payloads).     - sFlow (Sampled Flow Logging)         - Captures sampled packets from switches and routers.         - Used for real-time traffic monitoring and anomaly detection.     - Zeek (Bro) Flow Logs         - Zeek logs session-level details in logs like conn.log, http.log, dns.log, etc. - Host-Based Collection     - Sysmon Event ID 3 – Network Connection Initiated         - Logs process-level network activity, useful for detecting malicious outbound connections.     - AuditD (Linux) – syscall=connect         - Monitors system calls for network connections. `auditctl -a always,exit -F arch=b64 -S connect -k network_activity` - Cloud & SaaS Flow Monitoring     - AWS VPC Flow Logs         - Captures metadata for traffic between EC2 instances, security groups, and internet gateways.     - Azure NSG Flow Logs / Google VPC Flow Logs         - Logs ingress/egress traffic for cloud-based resources."
datasources,"name: Process | description: Instances of computer programs that are being executed by at least one thread. Processes have memory space for process executables, loaded modules (DLLs or shared libraries), and allocated memory regions containing everything from user input to application-specific data structures(Citation: Microsoft Processes and Threads) | collection layers: Host | platforms: Android, ESXi, Linux, Windows, iOS, macOS"
datasources,"name: Process: OS API Execution | description: Calls made by a process to operating system-provided Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). These calls are essential for interacting with system resources such as memory, files, and hardware, or for performing system-level tasks. Monitoring these calls can provide insight into a process's intent, especially if the process is malicious.  *Data Collection Measures:*  - Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) Tools:     - Leverage tools to monitor API execution behaviors at the process level.     - Example: Sysmon Event ID 10 captures API call traces for process access and memory allocation. - Process Monitor (ProcMon):     - Use ProcMon to collect detailed logs of process and API activity. ProcMon can provide granular details on API usage and identify malicious behavior during analysis. - Windows Event Logs:     - Use Event IDs from Windows logs for specific API-related activities:         - Event ID 4688: A new process has been created (can indirectly infer API use).         - Event ID 4657: A registry value has been modified (to monitor registry-altering APIs). - Dynamic Analysis Tools:     - Tools like Cuckoo Sandbox, Flare VM, or Hybrid Analysis monitor API execution during malware detonation. - Host-Based Logs:     - On Linux/macOS systems, leverage audit frameworks (e.g., `auditd`, `strace`) to capture and analyze system call usage that APIs map to. - Runtime Monitors:     - Runtime security tools like Falco can monitor system-level calls for API execution. - Debugging and Tracing:     - Use debugging tools like gdb (Linux) or WinDbg (Windows) for deep tracing of API executions in real time."
datasources,"name: Process: Process Creation | description: Refers to the event in which a new process (executable) is initialized by an operating system. This can involve parent-child process relationships, process arguments, and environmental variables. Monitoring process creation is crucial for detecting malicious behaviors, such as execution of unauthorized binaries, scripting abuse, or privilege escalation attempts.  *Data Collection Measures:*  - Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) Tools:     - EDRs provide process telemetry, tracking execution flows and arguments. - Windows Event Logs:     - Event ID 4688 (Audit Process Creation): Captures process creation with associated parent process. - Sysmon (Windows):     - Event ID 1 (Process Creation): Provides detailed logging - Linux/macOS Monitoring:     - AuditD (execve syscall): Logs process creation.     - eBPF/XDP: Used for low-level monitoring of system calls related to process execution.     - OSQuery: Allows SQL-like queries to track process events (process_events table).     - Apple Endpoint Security Framework (ESF): Monitors process creation on macOS. - Network-Based Monitoring:     - Zeek (Bro) Logs: Captures network-based process execution related to remote shells.     - Syslog/OSSEC: Tracks execution of processes on distributed systems. - Behavioral SIEM Rules:     - Monitor process creation for uncommon binaries in user directories.     - Detect processes with suspicious command-line arguments."
datasources,"name: Process: Process Metadata | description: Contextual data about a running process, which may include information such as environment variables, image name, user/owner, etc."
datasources,"name: Process: Process Termination | description: The exit or termination of a running process on a system. This can occur due to normal operations, user-initiated commands, or malicious actions such as process termination by malware to disable security controls.  *Data Collection Measures:*  - Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) Tools:     - Monitor process termination events. - Windows Event Logs:     - Event ID 4689 (Process Termination) – Captures when a process exits, including process ID and parent process.     - Event ID 7036 (Service Control Manager) – Monitors system service stops. - Sysmon (Windows):     - Event ID 5 (Process Termination) – Detects when a process exits, including parent-child relationships. - Linux/macOS Monitoring:     - AuditD (`execve`, `exit_group`, `kill` syscalls) – Captures process termination via command-line interactions.     - eBPF/XDP: Monitors low-level system calls related to process termination.     - OSQuery: The processes table can be queried for abnormal exits."
datasources,"name: Sensor Health | description: Information from host telemetry providing insights about system status, errors, or other notable functional activity | collection layers: Host | platforms: Android, Linux, Windows, iOS, macOS"
datasources,"name: Sensor Health: Host Status | description: Logging, messaging, and other artifacts that highlight the health and operational state of host-based security sensors, such as Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) agents, antivirus software, logging services, and system monitoring tools. Monitoring sensor health is essential for detecting misconfigurations, sensor failures, tampering, or deliberate security control evasion by adversaries.  *Data Collection Measures:*  - Windows Event Logs:     - Event ID 1074 (System Shutdown): Detects unexpected system reboots/shutdowns.     - Event ID 6006 (Event Log Stopped): Logs when Windows event logging is stopped.     - Event ID 16 (Sysmon): Detects configuration state changes that may indicate log tampering.     - Event ID 12 (Windows Defender Status Change) – Detects changes in Windows Defender state. - Linux/macOS Monitoring:     - `/var/log/syslog`, `/var/log/auth.log`, `/var/log/kern.log`     - Journald (journalctl) for kernel and system alerts. - Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) Tools:     - Monitor agent health status, detect sensor tampering, and alert on missing telemetry. - Mobile Threat Intelligence Logs:     - Samsung Knox, SafetyNet, iOS Secure Enclave provide sensor health status for mobile endpoints."
datasources,"name: User Interface | description: Visual activity on the device that could alert the user to potentially malicious behavior. | collection layers: Device | platforms: Android, iOS"
datasources,name: User Interface: Permissions Request | description: System prompts triggered when an application requests new or additional permissions
datasources,name: User Interface: System Notifications | description: Notifications generated by the OS
datasources,name: User Interface: System Settings | description: Settings visible to the user on the device
tactics,"name: Collection | description: The adversary is trying to gather data of interest to their goal.  Collection consists of techniques used to identify and gather information, such as sensitive files, from a target network prior to exfiltration. This category also covers locations on a system or network where the adversary may look for information to exfiltrate."
tactics,"name: Command and Control | description: The adversary is trying to communicate with compromised devices to control them.  The command and control tactic represents how adversaries communicate with systems under their control within a target network. There are many ways an adversary can establish command and control with various levels of covertness, depending on system configuration and network topology. Due to the wide degree of variation available to the adversary at the network level, only the most common factors were used to describe the differences in command and control. There are still a great many specific techniques within the documented methods, largely due to how easy it is to define new protocols and use existing, legitimate protocols and network services for communication.   The resulting breakdown should help convey the concept that detecting intrusion through command and control protocols without prior knowledge is a difficult proposition over the long term. Adversaries' main constraints in network-level defense avoidance are testing and deployment of tools to rapidly change their protocols, awareness of existing defensive technologies, and access to legitimate Web services that, when used appropriately, make their tools difficult to distinguish from benign traffic.  Additionally, in the mobile environment, mobile devices are frequently connected to networks outside enterprise control such as cellular networks or public Wi-Fi networks. Adversaries could attempt to evade detection by communicating on these networks, and potentially even by using non-Internet Protocol mechanisms such as Short Message Service (SMS). However, cellular networks often have data caps and/or extra data charges that could increase the potential for adversarial communication to be detected."
tactics,"name: Credential Access | description: The adversary is trying to steal account names, passwords, or other secrets that enable access to resources.  Credential access represents techniques that can be used by adversaries to obtain access to or control over passwords, tokens, cryptographic keys, or other values that could be used by an adversary to gain unauthorized access to resources. Credential access allows the adversary to assume the identity of an account, with all of that account's permissions on the system and network, and makes it harder for defenders to detect the adversary. With sufficient access within a network, an adversary can create accounts for later use within the environment."
tactics,name: Defense Evasion | description: The adversary is trying to avoid being detected.  Defense evasion consists of techniques an adversary may use to evade detection or avoid other defenses. Sometimes these actions are the same as or variations of techniques in other categories that have the added benefit of subverting a particular defense or mitigation. Defense evasion may be considered a set of attributes the adversary applies to all other phases of the operation.
tactics,"name: Discovery | description: The adversary is trying to figure out your environment.  Discovery consists of techniques that allow the adversary to gain knowledge about the characteristics of the mobile device and potentially other networked systems. When adversaries gain access to a new system, they must orient themselves to what they now have control of and what benefits operating from that system give to their current objective or overall goals during the intrusion. The operating system may provide capabilities that aid in this post-compromise information-gathering phase."
tactics,"name: Execution | description: The adversary is trying to run malicious code.  Execution consists of techniques that result in adversary-controlled code running on a mobile device. Techniques that run malicious code are often paired with techniques from all other tactics to achieve broader goals, like exploring a network or stealing data."
tactics,"name: Exfiltration | description: The adversary is trying to steal data.  Exfiltration refers to techniques and attributes that result or aid in the adversary removing files and information from the targeted mobile device.  In the mobile environment, mobile devices are frequently connected to networks outside enterprise control such as cellular networks or public Wi-Fi networks. Adversaries could attempt to evade detection by communicating on these networks, and potentially even by using non-Internet Protocol mechanisms such as Short Message Service (SMS). However, cellular networks often have data caps and/or extra data charges that could increase the potential for adversarial communication to be detected."
tactics,"name: Impact | description: The adversary is trying to manipulate, interrupt, or destroy your devices and data.  The impact tactic consists of techniques used by the adversary to execute his or her mission objectives but that do not cleanly fit into another category such as Collection. Mission objectives vary based on each adversary's goals, but examples include toll fraud, destruction of device data, or locking the user out of his or her device until a ransom is paid."
tactics,name: Initial Access | description: The adversary is trying to get into your device.  The initial access tactic represents the vectors adversaries use to gain an initial foothold onto a mobile device.
tactics,"name: Lateral Movement | description: The adversary is trying to move through your environment.  Lateral movement consists of techniques that enable an adversary to access and control remote systems on a network and could, but does not necessarily, include execution of tools on remote systems. The lateral movement techniques could allow an adversary to gather information from a system without needing additional tools, such as a remote access tool."
tactics,"name: Persistence | description: The adversary is trying to maintain their foothold.  Persistence is any access, action, or configuration change to a mobile device that gives an attacker a persistent presence on the device. Attackers often will need to maintain access to mobile devices through interruptions such as device reboots and potentially even factory data resets."
tactics,name: Privilege Escalation | description: The adversary is trying to gain higher-level permissions.  Privilege escalation includes techniques that allow an attacker to obtain a higher level of permissions on the mobile device. Attackers may enter the mobile device with very limited privileges and may be required to take advantage of a device weakness to obtain higher privileges necessary to successfully carry out their mission objectives.
